Author: Samuel Butler Samuel Butler (not to be mistaken for the seventeenth-century author of the same name who wrote Hudibras) was born in Nottinghamshire, England, December 4, 1835. He attended St. John’s College, Cambridge. His clergyman father had intended him for the ministry. Young Butler would have none of it. In 1859 he emigrated to New Zealand and set up a sheep run on the south island. Like so many of his contemporaries, he read Darwin’s Origin of Species with an effect of dazzling revelation. In five years he doubled his investment and sailed back to London. He tried painting and later composing music. His paintings were shown at the Royal Academy and his music was published. He wrote an anonymous book, Evidence for the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, in 1865. Seven years later, Erewhon (see below) gave him a first modest reputation. His more famous book, The Way of All Flesh, did not appear until a year after his death. An ironic argument for Christianity, The Fair Haven, was published in 1873. In three books on evolution, the last in 1887, Butler suggested that changes in species might be accounted for by the organism’s response to felt needs. His term, “the Life Force,” was later exploited by George Bernard Shaw. Butler, who was a devoted mountaineer, wrote an engaging book about Italian Switzerland. He translated the Iliad and the Odyssey. This interest in the Greek world led to his theory that the Odyssey had been written by a woman. Butler’s Notebooks—only a selection has been published—belong among the most fascinating of his works. He spent the better part of twelve years writing The Way of All Flesh, his massive condemnation of English family life. He died in London on June 18, 1902. We read four chapters from the fantasy Erewhon (pronounced er-uh-whon, an anagram for nowhere). It is nowhere indeed. Higgs, a big, blond Englishman, tells the story. Beyond the raw peaks and chasms of the mountain range, past the terrifying “circle of gigantic forms” like the stone statues on Easter Island, he looks down into the unheard-of country of Erewhon. It is the familiar entry into every Promised Land from the Hebrew Canaan to Daniel Boone’s Kentucky. But is Erewhon a Promised Land? Not quite. In the four centuries between Sir Thomas More’s Utopia and George Orwell’s 1984, the Utopian society has changed from heaven to something like hell, from the country that “ought to be” to the country that we hope will never be. In character and time, Erewhon lies somewhere between. It comes to us much later than Sir Francis Bacon’s New Atlantis or Gulliver’s Travels but earlier than Edward Bellamy’s Looking Backward or Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World. When Higgs goes down into Erewhon, he is put in prison at first and then taken in as the guest of one of the country’s richest men, Mr. Nosnibor—that is, Robinson spelled backwards. Everything else appears to be backwards too. We meet the narrator just as he is beginning to understand the laws and customs of the country. One of the first things he finds out is that in Erewhon illness is treated as a crime or misdemeanor, according to its severity, whereas crime is regarded as an illness. Thus it is the worst of bad form to say, “How do you do?” With Higgs we witness the trial of a man accused of chronic tuberculosis. He is sentenced to hard labor for life. Higgs, dismayed at first, comes round to the view that this is after all only an extreme example of the way unfortunate people are treated in his own country. Here we have a characteristic demonstration of the author’s satiric method. Butler’s method makes for an especially rich kind of compound satire. It reflects our own experience. In it nothing is altogether “wrong” or “right.” It is unfavorable to bold moral stands, but it allows Butler to show us the pros and cons on every side of a question. We are given, not the advocate’s view, but a fairly rounded and complete one. In the Erewhonian order of things, our own attitudes toward crime and illness have been transposed. We feel that there is something monstrous about the outlawing of physicians and the criminal prosecution of the sick. So, too, we may come to associate crime with sickness, and ask ourselves whether it is not sickness of another sort. Thus we are prepared for the lawbreaker who regards himself as a patient to be treated by the “straightener”—that uncanny anticipation of the present-day psychiatrist.