Author: Charles Lamb Charles Lamb was born in the Inner Temple, London, February 10, 1775. He went to school with Coleridge at Christ’s Hospital. They became close friends. In 1792 he took a job at East India House, where James Mill was later his colleague and John Stuart Mill would also be an official. Lamb held his post for thirty-three years. After an unlucky love affair, he entered an asylum for a while in 1795. During the following year his sister, Mary Lamb, became unbalanced and stabbed her mother to death. In order to prevent her spending the rest of her life in an asylum, Lamb arranged to take care of his sister. He did so until he died. Each time the warning symptoms showed themselves, Mary Lamb, quietly and in tears, would go back to the asylum again. Lamb’s plays, John Woodvil and Mr. H——, were produced but were not well received. In 1807 he and Mary Lamb published Tales Founded on the Plays of Shakespeare. Other children’s books and a number of articles for Leigh Hunt’s The Reflector were written before 1811. Lamb’s Specimens of English Dramatic Poets, together with Hazlitt’s lectures, helped to bring the lesser Elizabethan writers back into favor. The period of Lamb’s weekly literary evenings, described by Hazlitt, began about 1811. He proposed marriage to Fanny Kelly, an actress, but was refused. In 1818 his collected Works appeared—a little too early to include his best. In the London Magazine, after 1820, he began his most famous series, the Essays of Elia. (Elia was a “gay light-hearted foreigner” who had once been Lamb’s fellow clerk at South Sea House.) Lamb was pensioned and moved to the country at Enfield. His sister’s malady grew constantly worse. During this period his great joy was the Lambs’ adopted daughter, Emma Isola. He died at Edmonton, December 27, 1834, from erysipelas and the effects of a fall on the London Road. Lamb is the magician of the English familiar essay. At the first touch of his wand, we are friends. Happily we consent to go with him wherever he leads, charmed by the brisk voice, the liveliness of fancy, the literary reference from anywhere and everywhere that lights up each stone on the way. He is amused and amusing. We recall that he once joined the audience in hissing his own play. My First Play (the first he saw, not the first he wrote) may remind us of our own first visit to a theater. Lamb’s recollection centers on a green curtain and the unbearable time it takes to go up on the lighted world of the stage. His gift is that he can make us remember that waiting as it happened to us, so that we almost seem to remember what he is telling us about himself. We too fidget through the little preliminary drama of the weather. Will it stop raining? It does. We have “orders”—that is, passes—to the theater. They are a gift from his godfather the oilman. Lamb wanders off a little to chat happily about this godfather of his, who was a friend of the great Sheridan, and who left Charles a patch of land in Hertfordshire. Then we are in the theater—a theater doubly magical because it belongs to the late eighteenth century and so is a little strange to us. What is a nonpareil? A kind of apple. The attraction was probably a revival of Thomas Arne’s Artaxerxes—in effect an opera, with sung speeches. Lamb saw the traditional Harlequin at his tricks. The Rich he mentions was John Rich, father of English pantomime. Later he watches a pantomime of Robinson Crusoe, and it was just as he had imagined it. In Dream Children, Lamb tells stories of his own youth to the children he might have had. His grandmother, Mary Field, had been caretaker of just such a great house as he describes, in Hertfordshire. And a girl of that country, Ann Simmons, to whom his first sonnets were written, might well have been the imaginary dead wife Alice of his dreams. The third essay, Sanity of True Genius, makes a point that needs to be repeated in each generation. Art is not daydreaming. It is something willed. A true artist is seldom the servant of his visions. He is their master. They are the materials out of which he constructs his work, as a carpenter uses boards and nails to put up a house.