Author: Isaac Singer Isaac Bashevis Singer was born in Poland in 1904. He attended a rabbinical seminary in Warsaw and then began to write fiction in Hebrew, later turning to Yiddish. He went to the United States in 1935 and settled in New York. He has been on the staff of the Jewish Daily Forward since that time. Most of Singer’s stories, which he has been writing for more than thirty years, have appeared in the Jewish Daily Forward, in Yiddish, but they have been translated and have been published in many anthologies. In addition, two collections of his stories have appeared: Gimpel the Fool and Other Stories (1957) and The Spinoza of Market Street and Other Stories (1961), the title story of which is reprinted here. He is also the author of three novels: The Family Moskat (1950), which won the Louis Lamed Prize, Satan in Goray (1955), and The Slave (1962). The last is an heroic story of a Jew in Poland in the eighteenth century. Spinoza was a Jew, but aside from that fact he would seem to have little in common with the characters that inhabit most of Singer’s stories. These characters are ordinary, often simple folk (though they may be deeply versed in Jewish tradition), on the one hand, and strange demonic creatures of the imagination, on the other. Singer’s world is mad and unreal, from one point of view. Witches and mystical forces take on a kind of weird, topsy-turvy life. His heroes and heroines seem to be listening to voices that other people do not hear. Spinoza was neither ordinary, simple, nor demonic. His thought was complex and powerful, but it was also clear. The clarity and purity of Spinoza’s ideas are among the wonders of philosophy. Nevertheless, Singer has managed to make him a character in the story that follows. At first glance, it might almost seem that Spinoza is another of those strange, half-real figures that people the minds of Singer’s heroes. Spinoza seems to be almost as real to the main protagonist of this story, Dr. Fischelson, as the other living people in it. In a score of Singer stories there is a figure that plays much the same role. But Spinoza in this remarkable story plays another role, too. He is more than a mere figment of the imagination who has, nevertheless, a part in the action. He is also a great philosopher with a compelling view of the world. What is this view, as Singer, or perhaps only Dr. Fischelson, understands it? Spinoza stands for, and describes with magnificent eloquence, the eternal aspect of our ever changing, muddled, incomprehensible life. That eternal aspect, which is represented in this story by the stars, is not an illusion. But neither is the muddle that is represented in turn by the insects circling “the trembling flame,” then by Dr. Fischelson’s intestinal troubles, then by the crowd in Market Street seen from Dr. Fischelson’s high window, then by the “savage and passionate” cats which offend the hero, and finally by Black Dobbe, Dr. Fischelson’s bride. But the eternal aspect and the muddle do not, at least in this story, merely exist side by side. Perhaps they never do. Here at any rate they are in conflict. At the beginning of the story Dr. Fischelson runs to his window to see the stars in order to escape the heat and the buzzing insects. But at the window he sees not only the eternal stars but also the “half-lit bedlam” below and the “ignorant savage” of a cat. Life cannot be run away from; the muddle attacks Dr. Fischelson even in his own insides. He then, it seems, attempts to make his peace with it. He marries, he becomes a husband, he even, we are given to understand, loves. Yet he rises from his bed on his wedding night and seeks the stars once more. And he cries out to Spinoza, to the permanent, unchanging, eternal universe, that he has become a fool. His heartfelt words raise many questions. In uttering them, does Dr. Fischelson once and for all renounce the earthbound happiness which may be all that we creatures of the muddle know? Does he turn his back on his love for Black Dobbe and embrace once more the amor dei intellectualis [the intellectual love of god]? Is that one moment of passionate involvement in life to be his last? Or does he speak those last words with a kind of profound humility and acceptance? Is he saying that there are worse things than to be a fool? Is he asking for forgiveness because he, uniquely, has acted foolishly, or because foolishness is man’s eternal lot? The essence of this memorable tale is to be found in those last murmured words. Perhaps every reader will have to find it, and answer the questions raised by the words, for himself.