Author: Friedrich Schiller Johann Christoph Friedrich Schiller was born on November 10, 1759, at Marbach in Württemberg. His mother was the daughter of a small-town innkeeper, his father an army surgeon. Later, however, Schiller’s father served as superintendent of forests and nurseries on the estates of the duke Karl Eugen of Württemberg. The Duke entered Friedrich in “Solitude,” a military school he had founded. There young Schiller was forced to study law, although he had hoped to prepare for the church. When the school moved to Stuttgart, Schiller was allowed to take up the study of medicine. In 1780 he was appointed by the Duke as a regimental surgeon at Stuttgart. Schiller was upset by the tyranny of both the school and the Duke and attracted by the revolutionary authors of the period. In 1781 he published a play, Die Räuber (“The Robbers”). It was produced the next year at Mannheim, and Schiller stole away to attend the performance. It was so successful that he began to work on another tragedy. The Duke, however, hearing of a second visit by Schiller to Mannheim, had him placed under military arrest. The Duke forbade him to write any more and insisted that he not leave Württemberg. In 1782 Schiller fled from the duchy. After some weeks of extreme poverty and hunger, he finally found refuge in the home of a mother of a school friend at Bauerbach in Thuringia. Here he finished two plays, Fiesco and Kabale und Liebe (“Intrigue and Love”). He was appointed dramatist to the Mannheim Theater, but his contract was not renewed and Schiller stayed on in Mannheim for a while. Then, in 1785, he accepted the invitation of some admirers to visit Leipzig. For the next two years he was the guest of one of them, C.G.Körner, in Leipzig and Dresden. In 1787 he finished Don Carlos, written in blank verse. He also, at this time, wrote joyful poems, including An die Freude (“Ode to Joy”), the basis of the last movement of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony. Schiller went to Weimar in 1787. Two years later he was appointed honorary professor of history at Jena—following the publication of the first volume of a history of the revolt of the Netherlands—a position which he held until 1793. During this time he met and married Charlotte von Lengefeld. He became a friend of Goethe, who had an important influence on his thought and work. In 1799 he took up permanent residence in Weimar, partly to be near Goethe. He continued to write very successful historical dramas. During his last years he was plagued with ill-health. Schiller died at Weimar on May 9, 1805. Schiller was a Romantic. He was a German. In the first role he was a vigorous spokesman for his time. In the second, he was, and has often been since, an inspiration to his fellow nationals. There were three phases of Schiller’s career. At first he wrote Sturm und Drang (“Storm and Stress”) poetry and plays of social criticism. The ideas of this literary school, largely influenced by Rousseau, were concerned with individual rights and scorn for convention. These ideas had a great appeal to young Schiller, newly out of the clutches of the dictatorial Duke and hence in revolt against authority of all sorts. In the second stage of his writing life, he concentrated on history and philosophy, largely influenced by Kant. In the third, he wrote poetic dramas which exemplified his aesthetic ideas. On Simple and Sentimental Poetry is Schiller’s definition of his aesthetic principles and at the same time a statement of his ethics. The several pairs of concepts which Schiller talks of here repre- sent the differences between himself and Goethe—Goethe’s classic naïveté and his own Romantic sentimentalism. Schiller eulogizes the natural or simple, in typically Rousseau fashion. Children and childlike people (as different from childish people) have this simplicity to a high degree, he says—or, as Wordsworth put it, they are “trailing clouds of glory.” Further, he says that true genius is necessarily simple—that is, modest rather than decent; intelligent rather than cunning; faithful from natural necessity rather than principles. Schiller notes the dangers of growing out of this state of childlike simplicity. People may become burdened with troubles. They may become disillusioned “with the artifices, offended by the abuses…in social life.” Then, he says, the moral man must be careful to remain pure in the midst of impurities. It is fruitless and wrong then to yearn for lost innocence; there is no chance, and no sense in trying, to go back to a state of naïveté. “But when you have consoled yourself for having lost the happiness of nature,” he says, “let its perfection be a model to your heart.” Reasonable men have free will, he says. And, in the loss of naïve innocence, they must depend on that free will to be moral persons. Schiller explains the difference this way: the poet is nature, or he seeks nature. In the former case, he is a simple poet; in the second case a sentimental poet. The ideal, to Schiller, would be a perfect synthesis, each side keeping the other from excess. The title of this essay is almost paradoxical in its modesty. For “simple” read “Goethe and classic.” For “sentimental” read “Schiller and modern.” For “poetry” read “life.” Then the scope of the essay begins to be apparent.