Author: Henrik Ibsen The Norwegian poet and dramatist Henrik Johan Ibsen was born at Skien, March 20, 1828. His father, Knud Henriksen Ibsen, was a merchant whose business failed when Henrik was eight years old. In 1844 the boy left home to be apprenticed to a druggist in the small town of Grimstad. He hated the work, and spent his spare time writing poetry and reading. He wrote his first play, Cataline, in the winter of 1848–49. He left Grimstad for Christiania (Oslo) in 1850 to begin his literary career. He worked as a journalist, then was appointed assistant stage manager at a theater in Bergen, where he served until 1857. In that year he was appointed director of the National Theater in Christiania. During these years Ibsen gained experience in the theater and, at the same time, became interested in social questions. He continued to write plays, into which he began to interject psychological analysis. He took many of his themes from old Norwegian sagas and folk ballads. Ibsen applied for a writer’s pension but was denied it, and in 1864 he went to Italy. There he wrote his first masterpieces, Brand (1866) and Peer Gynt (1867). From this time on his fame was assured. The government finally granted him a poet’s pension, and he no longer had to fear poverty. After living for a while in Germany, he returned in 1891 to Christiania, where he died on May 23, 1906. Ibsen was one of the most influential dramatists of our time. He brought realism to the stage, and dealt with controversial social and philosophical questions. His work earned for him the reputation of “father of modern drama.” Post-Ibsen theater throughout Europe was radically different from what it had been before. George Bernard Shaw, to name only one playwright, was profoundly affected by Ibsen. Through all Ibsen’s work rans the thread of one great idea—the supreme importance of the individual. He saw the individual oppressed, and threatened, by many forms of tyranny; and he spent his dramatic strength protesting all forms of despotism. That he proposed no ideal system of government to obviate tyranny shows only that he was an artist, not a politician. That his shout of protest is still valid is proved by the fact that it rings as true today, in any part of the world, as it did in nineteenth-century Norway. Most people would agree with Ibsen that tyranny is evil; but not everyone recognizes as plainly as he did its many forms. People customarily think of tyranny as the rule by force of one man over an unwilling populace. Ibsen, however, saw and abhorred another form of tyranny as well—that of the majority. Ibsen was an eloquent, though by no means the first, spokesman for this point of view. Madison in The Federalist included the accumulation of power by the “many” in his definition of tyranny; John Stuart Mill and Tocqueville were both concerned with the tyranny of the majority. In Ibsen’s An Enemy of the People, the hero, Dr. Stockmann, struggles against the “compact majority” which insists on imposing its will on him. The majority, in his town, prefers to live a lie rather than sacrifice its own interest. By the end of the play, all of the doctor’s supporters have deserted him, and he has failed in his efforts to have the germ-filled baths of the town condemned. What is more, Ibsen appears to portray Dr. Stockmann as a sort of modern-day Don Quixote. The doctor is faintly ridiculous in his ponderous statements and in his naïve certainty that he will be acclaimed a hero for taking away the town’s source of income. And his determination, at the end of the play, to create a new breed of men by educating ignorant street urchins seems foolish. Perhaps this determination is not so much foolish as it is improbable of success. It appears to be Ibsen’s way of saying that idealism alone has little chance to defeat the tyranny of the masses. Though Ibsen is thus proposing no practical solution—solutions, in fact, are not his business—he may be pointing the way to the only effective defense against tyranny of any kind. “The strongest man in the world is he who stands most alone,” says Dr. Stockmann—these are his last words. The lone man standing, with justice on his side, against the tyrant is a familiar, and powerful, figure in drama. But he occurs in real life, too. He often suffers personal defeat, even death. But his heroic action does not die with him. It endures and makes life more just and livable for the rest of us. Idealism, instead of being foolish and impractical, may in the end be the only practical course.