Author: Lucius Apuleius Let me,” he wrote, “briefly introduce myself as Lucius Apuleius, a native of Madaura in North Africa, but of ancient Greek stock.” Born early in the second century, he claimed Plutarch as one of his real or imaginary ancestors. On the death of his father, a provincial magistrate, he and his brother between them inherited two million sesterces (nearly $100,000). Lucius went to school at the university in Carthage and later studied Platonic philosophy in Athens. At Corinth he was admitted into the religious cult of Isis. After studying rhetoric in Rome, he practiced at the Roman bar. On his travels in Egypt and Asia Minor, where he devoted himself to religion and philosophy, he fell sick near Alexandria and was nursed by Sicinius Pontianus, a schoolmate from Athens. Later he married Pontianus’ mother. But when she made over her large fortune to him, and Pontianus died soon after, her family charged that he had poisoned his friend and worked magic on his wife. Apuleius’ defense before the proconsul Claudius Maximus—it was called Apologia or De Magia (Of Magic)—remains our chief source for his life. He was found not guilty. His most famous work, The Metamorphoses of Lucius Apuleius of Madaura, is also the earliest complete Latin novel that we have. This is the story of how Lucius was turned into an ass, his adventures in that state, and how he was brought back to manhood by the goddess Isis. It is traditionally known as The Golden Ass, evidently because Apuleius wrote it in a literary style adapted from the pitchman’s lingo of the market-place storytellers. Thus “golden” is carnival talk for “wonderful” or “marvelous.” Robert Graves says that although Apuleius probably knew witchcraft, it was “the ‘right-hand’ or beneficent magic” pertaining to the goddesses Isis and Demeter. He seems to have been a priest of Isis and Osiris, and of the god of medicine, Aesculapius. He wrote histories and poems now lost. Cupid and Psyche” is a story from The Golden Ass, and one of the great stories of the world. Though Graves writes that the plot “is still widely current as a primitive folk-tale in countries as far apart as Scotland and Hindustan,” it is not found among the Greek myths. It has been a favorite in English, redone by William Morris in The Earthly Paradise, by Robert Bridges, and by Walter Pater in Marius the Epicurean. We read it here in Pater’s lordly translation. A love story? If we call it that we are almost guilty of punning. Its hero is Love himself, Cupid, the god of love, still “fairest among the deathless gods,” as Hesiod described him. Psyche’s name is a common Greek noun, used as early as Homer to mean “breath” or “life” or “spirit,” and later by Plato in the sense of “soul.” The story has been called “a neat philosophical allegory of the progress of the rational soul towards intellectual love.” No doubt it can be read in that light. Apuleius, as we know, was a student of Plato and probably had some such double meaning in mind. But we need to ask first what the story is about. Who is Psyche? She is a beautiful young girl in a fix. No storyteller could imagine a better opening than that. Moreover, she is a king’s daughter, to whom the best things of this world are promised. Instead, she suffers the cruelest injustice. Because of her beauty, which is not her fault, no one will marry her; and for the same reason she incurs the anger of Venus. She is Cinderella in reverse, she is too beautiful; and like Cinderella she has two wicked older sisters who hate her. What else do we see? Is Venus the cruel stepmother or mother-in-law of the fairy tales? Perhaps. Psyche is told that her lover is a dreadful serpent who will devour her and her child. We recognize that serpent. He comes out of the unconscious: a feminine or Freudian image of the terror of love. He was also, for the Greeks, a death image. Psyche has resolved to kill this monster who loves her, whose child she bears. But she must see him first. Her curiosity defies the forbidden, as Pandora and Bluebeard’s wives defied it. Psyche does it a second time, in opening Persephone’s box. This time she falls into “the sleep of the dead”—or dies, in one version of the story—from which she must be rescued by Cupid. We notice that the viewpoint shifts between Venus, Psyche, and her sisters. We get no glimpse of the story through male eyes. Its logic, its way of feeling, are purely feminine. Psyche’s father, Jupiter, and even Cupid are mere agents. Cupid, undependable male that he is, first ignores his mother’s errand and then flies off in a huff when Psyche burns him. For a god of love, he shows little understanding of women. We see finally why all this might be so. “Cupid and Psyche” is a young girl’s fantasy, beautifully done, and true in any country or time. This is how she daydreams about the delights and terrors of being beautiful and wronged; of a husband who is rich and a god; of a mother-in-law who is a powerful rival; of marrying, and bearing a child, and finding the immortality of happiness. “Now read on,” said Apuleius, “and enjoy yourself!”