Author: Edgar Allan Poe Edgar Allan Poe was born in Boston, Massachusetts, January 19, 1809. His parents were actors on tour. Both of them died in 1811. Poe’s godfather, a Richmond merchant, sent him to schools in England and Scotland, and later to the University of Virginia. Gambling debts forced him to withdraw. Poe published a first book of poems, Tamerlane, and joined the army. His guardian bought him out and arranged an appointment to West Point. Poe managed to get himself expelled. He went to New York and published his Poems in 1831. By 1835 he was editor of the Southern Literary Messenger and making a name as a critic. He married his cousin, Virginia Clemm, then hardly fourteen. It seems to have been a very tender relationship. Poe was dropped from the Messenger, evidently for drinking—a habit that plagued him all his life. In New York again, he published The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym. By 1839 he was an editor on Burton’s Gentleman’s Magazine; there he printed The Fall of the House of Usher, and in its successor, Graham’s, what came to be known as the first detective story, The Murders in the Rue Morgue. His Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque came out in 1839. He worked for his friend N.P.Willis on the New York Evening Mirror. There, in 1845, The Raven made him famous. He took a cottage at Fordham and wrote chitchat articles for Godey’s Lady’s Book. His wife, Virginia, died in 1847. He lived for a while in Providence, Rhode Island, where he was engaged to the poet Sarah Helen Whitman. This was broken off, but later she wrote a book defending his memory. In the intervals of drinking, he made his way back to Richmond. He was again engaged to his boyhood love, Elmira Royster, now widowed. He had one happy summer. Then he was picked up on the streets of Baltimore and taken to a hospital. His heart failed, and he died on October 7, 1849. A man who does not contribute his quota of grim stories nowadays,” said Leigh Hunt, a contemporary of Poe, “seems hardly to be free of the republic of letters. He is bound to wear a death’s head as part of his insignia.” Poe gave us more than his share. His stories and poems made him a member of the international community of nineteenth-century Romantics, which included Pushkin and Gogol in Russia; Hoffmann, Schiller, and the brothers Grimm in Germany; Hugo and Mérimée in France; Lamb, De Quincey, and Scott in Great Britain; and Hawthorne and Melville in the United States. We read two of Poe’s famous stories: The Tell-Tale Heart and The Masque of the Red Death. They belong among the most powerful and fascinating in all literature. Though his life may seem to discount it, Poe was a man of intellect first of all. We see it in his essays, The Philosophy of Composition (1846) and The Poetic Principle (1848 and 1850), which may be called the real beginning of American literary criticism. His first approach to a story or poem was intellectual. He conceived it as philosophers conceive an idea. In the light of this fact, we may discover a secret common to nearly all his stories. It is this: he thought of each story as the vehicle of a single overpowering emotion. For this emotion, in each case, he found a symbol—that is, a person, a thing, a place, a pattern of action—that would be and mean that emotion. Only after this did he work out a carefully machined and often theatrical plot to be locked on the symbol. As the critic Georges Poulet has observed, Poe tried to keep the element of chance and the spontaneous out of his stories. Thus they do not give us the feeling of what we call “life.” They resemble the intense helplessness of dreaming. Let us see how all this applies to The Tell-Tale Heart. Here the central emotion is guilt—guilt of the same kind as that suffered by Raskolnikov in Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment and accompanied by the same impulse to confess. Poe’s narrator kills an old man for no other reason than that he dislikes the old man’s cataracted blue eye. The symbol is the sound of the victim’s heartbeat—real at first, while he lies dying, and later beating louder and louder in the disordered imagination of the murderer until it forces him to shriek out his confession to the police. In The Masque of the Red Death, the controlling emotion is fear of death, its symbol the “Red Death” that announced itself in “scarlet stains” on the body of its victim. Like many of Poe’s other symbols, this one is extremely powerful. It summons up mankind’s ancient fear of epidemics, the plagues of the Middle Ages, perhaps even the plague that ravaged Paris in the author’s time. True to its title, the story itself becomes a Renaissance masque that has the quality of a morality play. No great wealth, it tells us, can escape death; no iron gates can shut it out. Death comes dancing in the midst of every human gaiety.