Author: Sir Walter Scott Walter Scott was born in Edinburgh, August 15, 1771. He was a descendant of Border clans on both sides. This helped to determine his lifelong bent for Scottish history and tradition. He read law and in 1792 became a member of the faculty of advocates. In 1799 he was made sheriff depute of Selkirkshire and seven years later clerk of session. He held both posts for twenty-five years. In 1796, after an unlucky love affair with Williamina Stuart of Fettercairn, he published some translations from Burger, a German Romantic poet. The following year he married Charlotte Charpentier, a French refugee. The first installment of his ballad collection, Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, came out in 1802. Three years later a long poem, The Lay of the Last Minstrel, established his name. Scott began Waverley but put it aside to write Marmion. This “took possession of the public like a kind of madness.” Lady of the Lake, in 1810, was hardly less popular. Scott built his famous house at Abbotsford. In the years up to 1825, beginning with Waverley, his unbelievable industry produced more than a score of novels, including Guy Mannering, Old Mortality, Rob Roy, The Heart of Midlothian, Ivanhoe, Kenilworth, Quentin Durward, Redgauntlet, and The Talisman. Then came ruin. Like Balzac and Mark Twain, Scott had tried his hand at printing and publishing, with much the same results. In the financial panic of 1826, the Edinburgh firm he had backed was involved in the crash of two London houses. Scott was personally liable to the tune of £130,000. He sat down to work off the debt. In two years, with such works as The Fair Maid of Perth and a nine-volume Life of Napoleon, Scott returned £40,000 to his creditors. He wrote on. In 1830 he had a first stroke. Others followed. As his mind faded, he began to believe that he had paid off his debt. (It was paid off in full, out of royalties, after his death.) A British Government vessel took him on a cruise of the Mediterranean. He was carried back across Europe and died at Abbotsford, September 21, 1832. Is The Two Drovers the first cowboy story in our literature? Perhaps not. There were cowboys of a sort in James Fenimore Cooper’s The Spy, published in 1821. Scott’s tale did not come along until 1827. It appeared, with two other stories, in Chronicles of the Canon gate. This was turned out as a part of Scott’s galloping effort to satisfy his creditors. Like Balzac, Scott often worked best under great pressure. We cannot help noticing that the story is well put together and solidly written. Does it resemble one of our western stories? Yes and no. There are herds being driven to market, a quarrel over grazing land, a fight in a bar, a murder, and a trial. A western story often reaches its crisis in the battle between a cowboy who has a code of honor and an outlaw who despises such limitations. Often, in the western story, a man must make his own law as best he can. In Scott’s story, the final key is the accepted presence of the law. Scottish clansmen, says the judge in the story, “regarded themselves as so many cavaliers or men-at-arms.” Is this not also true of the American cowboy and the Argentine Gaucho, at least as they appear in the romances about them? Scott carries the idea of a code of honor one step farther. He brings two such codes into conflict: the Englishman’s stand-up-and-fight and the Scot’s touch-me-and-you-die. In a rather simple way, these involve two national spirits and traditions, two kinds of upbringing, two unlike breeds of men. Nor can we forget that there is a long history of violence between them. Even so, it is the friendship between Robin Oig and Harry Wakefield that gives the story its dark pathos. They are men of a common calling. In everyday things they understand and respect each other. Each is capable of unqualified generosity and shows it. But there is a cloud between them—a cloud their understanding cannot penetrate. In a certain sense, each is a victim of his national code. Does Scott mean to tell us that the wars of nations are like that too? But the act of revenge is done and Robin Oig stands before the court. Now the two clashing ideas of honor come under the rule of a third idea: justice. Of the trial itself, we hear little—why should we? we have seen the evidence—but the judge’s instructions to the jury. (We recall that Scott had passed the bar.) In Melville’s Billy Budd, or in Hugo’s “The Battle with the Cannon,” we may have certain reservations about the justice of the decisions, because of their coldness. Not so in the trial of Robin Oig. Here the judge’s speech is everywhere touched with a grave and understanding sympathy.