Author: Percy Bysshe Shelley Percy Bysshe Shelley was born at Field Place in Sussex, England, on August 4, 1792. His father was a lawyer and member of Parliament. Shelley entered Eton at the age of twelve. His classmates called him “mad Shelley” because of his outspoken atheism. He went to Oxford in 1810 but was expelled at the end of five months for writing a pamphlet that attacked religion. In 1811 Shelley eloped with Harriet Westbrook, a girl of sixteen. The couple separated in 1815, and the following year Harriet killed herself. After her death Shelley married Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin, the daughter of William Godwin, an essayist and political philosopher. In 1818 the Shelleys left England for Italy, where the poet lived for the rest of his life. He had already published three long poems: Queen Mab, Alastor, and The Revolt of Islam. In the remaining few years of his life, Shelley traveled in Italy. He visited with friends, especially Byron, and continued to write poetry, the subject matter and approach of which were in the Romantic vein of his time. His most famous long poem was Adonais, an elegy on the death of Keats. Shelley thought of himself primarily as a reformer, a champion of beauty who would purify life of evil and ugliness. Matthew Arnold characterized Shelley’s Romanticism by describing him as “a beautiful and ineffectual angel, beating in the void his luminous wings in vain.” The poet’s success as a reformer may be questionable, but some of his lyric poems, such as To a Skylark, Ode to the West Wind, and The Cloud, are ranked with the greatest in English. Shelley was drowned on July 8, 1822, while sailing with a friend off Leghorn, Italy. His body was recovered and cremated on the beach. When Shelley set out to defend poetry he did a thorough job of it. In A Defence of Poetry, he attempts to prove that poets are philosophers; that they are the creators and protectors of moral and civil laws; and that if it were not for poets, scientists could not have developed either their theories or their inventions. How is it possible to make such extravagant claims for poetry, which, for many people, is at worst useless and trivial, and at best an impractical delight? Shelley starts by drawing a distinction between “reason” and “imagination.” Imagination, he says, is “the principle of synthesis,” reason “the principle of analysis.” Imagination involves being, reason involves relations. “Reason is the enumeration of quantities already known; imagination is the perception of the value of those quantities, both separately and as a whole.” “Poetry,” he goes on, “in a general sense, may be defined to be ‘the expression of the imagination.’” We see immediately that he does not mean only verse. “The distinction between poets and prose-writers,” he writes, “is a vulgar error.” Bacon was a poet, he says, and so was Plato—not because they wrote beautifully (though they did that), but because they spoke the truth. Any important truth is, for Shelley, primarily poetic. “A poem is the very image of life expressed in its eternal truth.” But poetry is not only writing, either. “The functions of the poetical faculty are twofold; by one it creates new materials of knowledge, and power, and pleasure; by the other it engenders in the mind a desire to reproduce and arrange them.” It is because of this that poetry is the creator and supporter of morals and law. But it is also for this reason that poetry underlies, and anticipates, scientific discoveries. Science, Shelley maintains, is analytical; it deals only with relations between things which are already known. Poetry finds new things. It puts together rather than takes apart. It creates rather than breaks down. It produces a one rather than a many. If there were no poets to find new truths, there would be no science to find the relations between them. Given this exalted sense of the term, it is possible that no one will dispute Shelley’s view. Clearly, there are some scientists who are “poets” in Shelley’s meaning of the word. Newton was one, Einstein another. Both had vital and vibrant imaginations. And a politician could be a poet, too. Dante had what is sometimes called, by hard-headed realists, a “dream” of world government. That dream, as expressed in De Monarchia, will perhaps never come true—exactly or completely. But the fact that Dante had it, Shelley would perhaps contend, is the reason why the world now has a United Nations. Great ideas exist first in the poetic mind. The man of reason, who is also necessary, follows after. The most famous statement from A Defence of Poetry is its concluding sentence: “Poets are the unacknowledged legislators of the world.” This statement has been held to be nonsense or “romantic” exaggeration. But a careful reading of the essay will show that it makes sense. It follows from what Shelley has said. Given his view, it is undeniable.