Author: Oscar Wilde Oscar Wilde was born in Dublin, on October 16, 1854. His father was a distinguished eye-and-ear specialist, and his godfather the King of Sweden, for whom Wilde may have been named. He took the gold medal for Greek at Trinity College, and a double first at Oxford. Like Matthew Arnold, he was given the Newdigate Prize for poetry. Even before he left Oxford, he had taken care to become known as the apostle of “art for art’s sake,” a doctrine announced some forty years earlier by Théophile Gautier in the preface to Mademoiselle de Maupin. Wilde was caricatured in Punch and burlesqued in the Gilbert and Sullivan opera Patience. His second book of poems appeared in 1881. The following year he made a twelve-month lecture tour of the United States. Audiences were entertained by his witty and deliberate affectations. The newspapers jeered. He wore a sunflower and velvet knee breeches among the Colorado miners, but earned their respect by drinking the best of them under the table. In Paris, Wilde met Victor Hugo, Edgar Degas the painter, and Émile Zola. Back in London, he married the charming Constance Lloyd in 1884. They had two sons. Wilde became book reviewer for the Pall Mall Gazette and editor of the Woman’s World. In 1888 he published a first book of fairy stories, The Happy Prince and Other Tales (see below). In 1891 came four books in a row: more fairy tales in A House of Pomegranates; Lord Arthur Savile’s Crime and Other Stories; the paradoxical essays in Intentions; and The Picture of Dorian Gray, a novel that became the centerpiece of the nineties movement in literature. A year later the first of his successful plays, the glittering Lady Windermere’s Fan, was produced in London. Equally brilliant openings welcomed A Woman of No Importance in 1893 and An Ideal Husband in January, 1895. A month later, The Importance of Being Earnest brought Wilde to the peak of his fame. In April of that year Wilde charged the Marquess of Queensberry with criminal libel. He was acquitted. On the same day Wilde was arrested on morals charges that involved Lord Alfred Douglas, Queensberry’s son. Wilde was sentenced to two years at hard labor. He wrote De Profundis in Reading Gaol. When he was released he took the name of “Sebastian Melmoth” and settled in Berneval, France. There he wrote The Ballad of Reading Gaol. After two years of wandering in Italy, Switzerland, and France, he died in Paris on November 30, 1900. At a distance of more than half a century, we can see clearly now that Wilde was at bottom a religious moralist. Even his cult of art had that secondary sense. This becomes plain if we compare it with Gautier’s original view, or Flaubert’s. Wilde hoped that art would improve people’s lives. He had enlisted in the same crusade as Matthew Arnold. Both were trying to civilize what they regarded as the barbarian middle classes—Arnold by exhorting them, Wilde by startling and amusing them. Even such a delightful little story as The Happy Prince is as much a parable as it is a fairy tale. The Happy Prince is no longer happy, because he has discovered the misfortunes of the world. He is a paradox of the kind Wilde was so fond of: the Happy Prince who weeps. He wears gold from head to foot—the glow of his Christian saintliness. Like a true saint, he gives away his gold and jewels to help the needy. His heart is lead because it is weighted down with the grief of humanity. When we first meet the swallow, he is quite a different sort—practical, worldly, and a great traveler. He is reluctant to play Sancho Panza to the Prince’s saintly Don Quixote. He points out quite reasonably that boys throw stones, that the weather is getting cold, and that he is expected in the south. Indeed, he becomes very eloquent about the wonders of Egypt, where the yellow lions have eyes like green beryls and the red ibis stand in rows along the Nile. But gradually, ignoring his own desires, he becomes more and more dedicated to the Prince’s good works. He is overcome by the experience of religious conversion. He refuses to leave. So he falls dead at the feet of the blind Prince. And what is his death, we ask ourselves, if it is not an act of Christian martyrdom? Wilde tells the story with neat little witty asides, touches of fancy and of genuine imagination, the satiric effectively alternated with the lyrical. Here and there—as, for example, when the Prince’s heart breaks—he barely avoids the sentimental. In that scene he does it with one matter-of-fact, ironic sentence: “It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.” The mayor perceives that the Prince has lost his splendor of gold and jewels. For an instant we are afraid that he may decide that they have been stolen and begin a search for them. But he orders the statue to be pulled down. “As he is no longer beautiful, he is no longer useful,” says the art professor. This is Wilde at his most paradoxical.