Author: Sainte-Beuve Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve was born on December 23, 1804, at Boulogne-sur-Mer, France. His father, a commissioner of taxes, died before Charles’s birth, leaving his mother little money. Until the boy was fourteen, he was educated at Boulogne. Then he went to the Collège Charlemagne in Paris. In 1823 Sainte-Beuve began to study medicine, but from 1824 on he combined literary journalism with his medical studies. After 1827 he gave up medicine altogether and devoted all his time to literature. He became a regular critic for several Paris reviews. Sainte-Beuve’s essays were sympathetic to the writers of his own generation. These young Frenchmen—Flaubert, Mérimée, and others—had been fired by the ideas of Schiller, Goethe, and the English Romantic poets. Sainte-Beuve was one of their earliest champions. Sainte-Beuve was especially friendly with Victor Hugo and his wife, until he fell passionately in love with Mme Hugo. This brought an end to the friendship and marked the beginning of deep spiritual and intellectual unrest for Sainte-Beuve. In addition to literary criticism, he wrote poems and one novel, Volupté. Sainte-Beuve was elected to the French Academy in 1844. He lectured at Lausanne and at Liège, where he was professor of French literature for a time. In 1854 he was appointed professor of Latin poetry at the Collège de France; but, because of his pro-government political beliefs, the students refused to hear his lectures and he was forced to resign the post. Sainte-Beuve was appointed a member of the Senate in 1865. He died in Paris on October 13, 1869. On his instructions, he was buried without any religious ceremony. Sainte-Beuve has been called the father of modern criticism. He believed that criticism was itself an art rather than simply a means of commenting on art. Two ideas characterize Sainte-Beuve’s view of criticism. Both place him as an articulate spokesman of his time. He held that because literature reflects its time and place, the evaluation of any work necessarily varies according to the reader’s background. He championed the “romantic” literature of his age against the “classical” style favored by older critics. But even though he was, on the whole, a defender of the “romantics” against the “classical” writers, his definition of a classic work includes both. “A true classic,” he writes, “…is an author who has enriched the human mind, increased its treasure, and caused it to advance a step; who has discovered some moral and not equivocal truth, or revealed some eternal passion in that heart where all seemed known and discovered.” The emphasis is thus on the classic author’s knowledge and insight, not on his style. A classic can be expressed, he says, “in no matter what form, only provided it be broad and great, refined and sensible, sane and beautiful in itself.” It speaks “to all in (its) own peculiar style, a style which is found to be also that of the whole world, a style new without neologism, new and old, easily contemporary with all time.” This definition, which contains much food for thought, is clearly very far from being applicable only to the writers of one or another epoch. It does not exalt Wordsworth and Coleridge (typical “romantics”) above Pope and Dr. Johnson (typical “classical” writers). It includes all great authors. It demands only that they be great. “There is no receipt for making classics,” Sainte-Beuve writes. “With regard to classics the least expected prove the best and greatest.” He does not mean that originality is the highest virtue of great literature. Virgil “imitated” Homer; yet both are classics. And Dante imitated Virgil. Their spontaneity lies in the freshness of what they added. Though Virgil and Dante had models which they followed, they are at the same time always new. Classics are always new; but they are also deeply bedded in the common stock of human knowledge and experience. A work that was entirely new could hardly be a classic. It would share nothing of importance with its readers. Sainte-Beuve peoples an imaginary “temple of taste” with writers whom he believes to be classics. The immense variety in his choices proves that there is no one characteristic or set of characteristics which makes a classic. The only true test is whether a book gives us “that sensation of serenity and amenity…which reconciles us with mankind and with ourselves.” The best books, he says, are our best friends. Montaigne was, for Sainte-Beuve, a classic author. In the second essay reprinted below, we see Sainte-Beuve’s philosophy of criticism put into practice. Following his tenet that a book should be studied at least partly through its author, he tells us a good deal about Montaigne and leaves the judgment of individual works to us. Both in Montaigne’s time and in Sainte-Beuve’s, France was in political turmoil. The critic, writing three hundred years after the essayist, admires the personal traits that served Montaigne so well in time of crisis. Montaigne was moderate, orderly, witty, optimistic, fair, humble, and courageous, says Sainte-Beuve. Such a man is good to have around in time of trouble. As to trouble itself, Sainte-Beuve concludes that Montaigne’s most pertinent advice may be not to anticipate it. The man who looks for trouble does not generally have to look far. Sainte-Beuve’s essays were titled, in the original, Causeries. The French word means “talks” or “chats.” There is no question that the tone of the following essays is chatty and informal. This is one of the best things about them. Sainte-Beuve is a critic who is easy to read. He is entertaining. But that, he says, is one of the criteria of a classic author—that he entertain. By this token, Sainte-Beuve is himself a classic.