Author: Arthur Schopenhauer Arthur Schopenhauer was born in Danzig on February 22, 1788. His father, Heinrich, was a well-to-do merchant who had strongly liberal political opinions and broad cultural interests. His mother, Johanna, was a very intelligent woman and a successful novelist. Heinrich Schopenhauer’s dislike of authoritarian government caused him to move the family to Hamburg in 1793 when Danzig surrendered to Prussia. At an early age young Arthur’s exceptional intelligence became evident. He studied at Hamburg, and in England and France, and then went into business at Hamburg. After his father’s sudden death, probably by suicide, in 1805, Arthur took up his studies again, concentrating on classical literature, medicine, and philosophy. At the University of Berlin, from 1811 to 1813, he attended lectures by J.G. Fichte, of whose philosophy he became very scornful. He determined to work out his own philosophy, taking off from the ideas of Immanuel Kant. Schopenhauer’s doctoral thesis, On the Fourfold Root of the Prin ciple of Sufficient Reason, was published in 1813. He went to live with his mother in Weimar, where, in her salon, he met many stimulating thinkers, including Goethe. After a quarrel with his mother, Schopenhauer left Weimar for Dresden in 1814. There he wrote his major work, The World as Will and Idea. He expected that this would be immediately accepted as an important, even revolutionary, philosophical work, but what little attention it attracted was unfavorable. Schopenhauer began lecturing at the University of Berlin in 1820, but here too he failed. Hegel was the most highly thought of philosopher in Berlin at the time, and Schopenhauer’s outspoken scorn for him was unpopular. From 1822 to 1831 Schopenhauer went from Italy to Munich and back to Berlin, traveling and living in isolation, a sick and resentful man. Finally, in 1831, he settled in Frankfurtam-Main, where he lived in bitter solitude, continuing his attack on Hegel in occasional essays. The apparent pessimism of Schopenhauer’s philosophy—based on the idea that will is the foundation of the universe and that will is basically evil—was out of tune with his time. By 1850, however, the world mood had altered somewhat and Schopenhauer began to acquire some fame, especially in England, Russia, and the United States. He died at Frankfurt on September 21, 1860. There is one aspect of Schopenhauer’s personality and writing that most often comes to mind whenever his name is mentioned—his pessimism. It is difficult, however, if not dangerous, to accept such pigeonholing of so complex a person as Schopenhauer. His “pessimism” may be only a matter of point of view. His philosophy admits no possibility of free will. We cannot hope to improve our lot by our own efforts because we have no control over events—that is the province of Will. What we can hope for is not progress but quiet. This may appear a dismal state. But E.F.J.Payne, a translator of Schopenhauer, suggests in an introduction that it is no more pessimistic than the teachings of Brahmanism, Buddhism, and Christianity, which preach that the highest goal is the deliverance from earthly existence. Nietzsche, in an essay about Schopenhauer, goes even further and suggests that the philosopher is actually “joyful” for having faced a somber truth squarely and conquered it. There is one point, however, on which all readers of Schopenhauer agree, whether or not they find his philosophy congenial. He is a fine writer. The clear beauty of his style makes his work a pleasure to read. Like many good workmen, Schopenhauer is impatient with people who abuse his craft. He is as irked as Virginia Woolf with mediocre writing, but he does not use her ladylike restraint in expressing his impatience. In On Style he dismisses Fichte and the Hegelians as “miserable dunces.” Their complicated style, he says, is only a cover-up for paucity of ideas. This outspoken, often angry, frankness works on us sometimes as a sudden bang does on a person dropping off to sleep. It startles us to a sharp awareness, sometimes to agree with him, sometimes to argue. Schopenhauer uses his shock tactics to good advantage in On Some Forms of Literature. From the first arbitrary statement that drama is the most perfect reflection of human existence, we know that we are reading a man who has strong opinions and does not hesitate to state them boldly. About the novel he says that insight, not incident, is the important thing. “The business of the novelist,” he says, “is not to relate great events, but to make small ones interesting.” He lists the four greatest novels. It is interesting to guess what his opinion would be of contemporary novelists. Using his own criteria, would he approve, for example, of Mann, Gide, Joyce, and Virginia Woolf? Would he disapprove of Hemingway? Dealing a sarcastic blow at conventional historians—“History has always been the favorite study of those who wish to learn something without having to face the effort demanded by any branch of real knowledge, which taxes the intelligence”—he goes on to describe the acceptable historian. After a few additional shocks to complacency, Schopenhauer concludes that “a high degree of culture leads us to seek entertainment almost wholly from books and not from men.” On the Comparative Place of Interest and Beauty in Works of Art has fewer bald statements of opinion presented as inarguable fact, but just as many stimulating ideas. By getting our agreement to a series of carefully reasoned premises, Schopenhauer brings us, as Plato does, to agree in conclusion to a proposition about which we might have argued in the beginning.