Author: Leo Tolstoy Count Leo Tolstoy was born into a family of landed gentry at Yasnaya Polyana, Tula, Russia, on August 28, 1828 (Old Style). Both parents died when he was a child. In 1844 he entered Kazan University, but showed more taste for society than for the academic. By 1850 he was living the life of a young man about town in Moscow. He enlisted in the artillery and did garrison duty among the Cossacks. In 1852 his first published work, Childhood, appeared in a magazine. Commissioned in 1854, he saw action against the Turks and served through the siege of Sevastopol. He was afterward posted to St. Petersburg. He frequented society and made two visits to Western Europe. The Cossacks, begun in 1854, was not published until 1862. Meantime he produced Two Hussars, Lucerne, Boyhood, Youth, and other works. In 1857 he resigned from the army and five years later married Sophie Behrs. They spent a large part of each year at Yasnaya Polyana, where Tolstoy became an efficient manager of his estates and began work on his masterpiece, War and Peace. In 1869, after several years of work, the final installment was published. Four years later he embarked on Anna Karenina, his second great work. Distracted by other projects, he did not finish the book until 1877. Before it was ended he had undergone a religious conversion, set off by his famous experience at Arzamas, the hallucination of sudden death. He wrote an account of these experiences later in A Confession and Notes of a Madman. This change of heart was accompanied by a change in his way of life and in his view of literature. He stated this view in What Is Art? and it is reflected in Resurrection, perhaps the least effective of his novels. But it must also have been applied to such masterly later fiction as The Death of Ivan Ilyitch (see below), Master and Man, Hadji Murad, and The Kreutzer Sonata. Tolstoy had nine children. With the exception of works written after 1880, he gave his wife power of attorney over all his property and lived like a peasant guest in his own household. He became a vegetarian, did manual labor, and devoted himself to social and ethical teaching. Like his friend Gandhi and Thoreau he preached the doctrine of nonviolence. He is regarded as one of the two or three greatest novelists in literature. His ethical views made him a world figure. He died in a railway station at Astapovo on November 7, (O.S. 20) 1910. In reading Tolstoy’s later works, we need to distinguish between those that seem to be addressed to the same world audience as War and Peace and what he called his Popular Stories. The latter are no less serious, but they are much more plainly written. They make a simple religious point. They were meant to be read by the peasants and poor people in general. We may define the difference in another way by saying that the stories of the first kind were usually about people of the middle and upper classes, whereas the popular stories were about poor people and embodied their viewpoint. In Tolstoy’s Russia, as he knew very well, these were all but separate cultures. The Death of Ivan Ilyitch belongs in the first class. No word but genius will do for it. Perhaps nothing else in literature speaks so directly to the final point of human life: that every man must die, and that every man must face his own dying and somehow make peace with it. Certain men, soldiers and others in dangerous trades, may face it many times in their lives. But to Ivan Ilyitch, who has lived with serene equanimity on the level of the acceptable and conventional, it comes only once, for the first and last time. It comes as pure horror. Beginning as an ordinary household accident, it is dismissed and returns, variously diagnosed by various physicians. It strikes down through layer after layer of Ivan Ilyitch’s consciousness, in three ways: (1) as an increasing bodily pain and disintegration; (2) as a withdrawal from and slight disturbance of his bourgeois family and professional circle; (3) as a rising terror of death, which turns into something else. This “something else” is what Tolstoy is chiefly concerned with. In the end, it absorbs every other element in the story and transforms it. We begin with the formal announcement of Ivan Ilyitch’s death and the conventional reaction of his colleagues. When we have read the story, we will see that this is its final irony. In effect, nothing has happened. The waters of Ivan Ilyitch’s world have closed over him without a ripple. But we know that it is not true. We have taken part in his dying. We have seen that, like Marcher in Henry James’s The Beast in the Jungle, he discovers, too late, that he has never truly lived. But in the last two hours left to him, he falls through into “light.” What is this light? The end of his terror? Understanding? Love? The knowledge of God? In the perfect rightness of his art, Tolstoy does not tell us. Both What Men Live By and The Three Hermits belong among his Popular Stories. In his old age Tolstoy was asked which of his works he considered the best. He mentioned, not War and Peace, but What Men Live By and one other devotional story. We are troubled at first by the events in What Men Live By. How can this be a just God, this God who punishes his servant Mikhaïla for showing Christian compassion to a mother and her newborn children? We read it again, and though we may not agree, we understand that this is part of the lesson Tolstoy wishes us to learn. And how can we help but be enchanted by the simple men of God in The Three Hermits? These are true parables transfigured into art.