Author: Guy de Maupassant Guy de Maupassant, a stockbroker’s son, was born at the château of Miromesnil, near Dieppe, France, on August 5, 1850. He grew up on his mother’s estate at Étretat, in a crowd of sailors’ and peasants’ children. In 1867 he entered Caen University with the intention of studying law. But he got his real education as the disciple of Gustave Flaubert. Flaubert went over his manuscripts and introduced him to such Sunday intimates as Zola, Daudet, and Turgenev. Maupassant left school to serve in the army during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. When he was discharged the next year, he took a job as a clerk in the Ministry of Marine. Like Monet, Mallarmé, and others, he was fond of boating on the Seine. He published a first book, Some Verses, in 1880. That same year Zola and his circle of young writers brought out a joint collection of stories about the war of 1870, called Evenings at Médan. Maupassant’s contribution, Boule de suif (“Ball of Tallow”), made him instantly famous. Between that year and his final mental breakdown in 1891, he produced work enough to fill thirty books. In 1881 he brought out a first book of stories, La Maison Tellier. In 1883 came a novel, A Life, and two books of stories, Mademoiselle Fifi and Tales of the Wood cock. Four books of stories—Moonlight, The Rondoli Sisters, Yvette, and Miss Harriet—appeared the following year. In 1885 he published Bel-Ami, a novel about a cynical Parisian journalist. His work sold so well that he was able to buy a small yacht for cruising on the Mediterranean. He named her “Bel Ami.” Out of this came two books of Mediterranean impressions, On the Water and The Roving Life. He published four more novels—Mont- Oriol, Pierre and Jean, Strong as Death, and Our Heart—plus such later volumes of stories as The Horla, Madame Husson’s Rosebush, and The Useless Beauty. He is remarkable for his precise craftsmanship, his eye for the timelessly human, and his austere loyalty to “the plain truth” as he saw it. In 1892, when he felt his mind giving way, he tried to commit suicide at Cannes. He died in Paris on July 6, 1893. He writes a scant 2,500 words in the exact, impersonal tone of a military history, and there it is—Two Friends, a small masterpiece about war and death and nature, the honor and happiness of ordinary men. It happens at Colombes, along that second hook of the Seine that lies northwest of the center of Paris. But it might have happened anywhere, in any war—on the Scamander River before Troy, or along the Wei River in one of China’s thousand wars, or at Vicksburg on the Mississippi in the American Civil War. At the same time we recognize its quality as distinctively Parisian and French. It takes place toward the end of the Franco-Prussian War, during the siege of Paris, when Victor Hugo recorded that he ate rat and the skill of any great chef might be tested by a demand that he cook a ragout of hippopotamus or a haunch of leopard from the zoo. So, to their old and serene delight in fishing for fishing’s sake, M.Morissot the watchmaker and M.Sauvage the draper (dry goods dealer) now add the motive of simple hunger. And for once the Seine promises to feed her children well. We have seen how charmingly, and with what right touches, Maupassant caught the city men’s pleasure in the serenity of their countryside—the hot morning evaporation of mist from the spring river. Now they are back again, at their favorite perch along the bank, on the first fine day of the year. But nothing is quite the same. War has touched the river, the plain, the heights at Sannois with her dark wing. And in a little while the guns on the fortified summit of Mont Valérien, west of the Bois de Boulogne, begin to speak. “There they are, at it again,” says M.Sauvage. It is perfectly put. It says everything. For the moment, he and M.Morissot, as usual entirely in accord on the primary things, are not Frenchmen or Parisians, Royalists or Republicans, or even fishermen. They are simply men—plain men, who know in their bones what war is, and that nothing good can come of it. They discuss it calmly, with distaste, reasonable even when they disagree as to which party may be responsible for it. But the sun is high and their little bounty of gudgeon wriggles and glints in the net bag. We feel suddenly the rightness of Maupassant’s symbol: that those fish are life—life saved from hunger, life out of the pleasant river of peace, life in all its squirming aliveness. Then suddenly there are men “dressed like liveried footmen.” M.Morissot and M.Sauvage stand before a “hairy giant…smoking a long porcelain pipe.” We know that giant. He is the ogre out of the fairy tales. He is the man in every war who never loses his appetite over other people’s deaths. He is made for war, and war is made for him. He presents them with a simple choice: betray the password, or die. So, with their own lives and honor at stake, they must take part in this war they want nothing to do with. They must choose. And the bag of fish, like life itself, lies wriggling at their feet. It is precisely here that Maupassant makes his deepest point. M.Morissot and M.Sauvage—who are they but Everyman in peace and war? They fish in a placid river and are suddenly confronted with the instant choice of life or death. Can they betray their country? And if not, is it themselves they must betray?