Author: Victor Hugo Victor (Marie) Hugo was born in Besançon, France, February 26, 1802. His father later served as a Napoleonic general. Victor’s childhood was “inflamed by many journeys” to Corsica, Italy, and Spain. At seventeen he won the chief prize for poetry at Toulouse. A first book of poems, in 1822, was intended to please the eye of Louis XVIII, and did. Hugo was given a pension. That same year he married his childhood friend, Adèle Foucher. His brother Eugène, who was also in love with her, went out of his mind at the wedding. In 1823 Hugo published a “tale of horror,” Hans of Iceland. He was given the Legion of Honor. He began to move toward Romanticism. His preface to the drama Cromwell became the manifesto of that movement. In 1829 he produced The Orientals and most of another book of poems, The Last Day of a Condemned Man, and a large part of the novel Nôtre Dame de Paris, plus two dramas, Marion de Lorme and Hernani. On February 25, 1830, the uproar at the opening of Hernani—it went on for forty or more nights and became known as the “Battles of Hernani”—established that date as the birthday of the Romantic movement in France. Under the July Monarchy Hugo flourished as the most famous of French poets. The medieval color of Nôtre Dame de Paris made it popular. In his play Lucrezia Borgia, a small part was taken by Juliette Drouet. She remained his faithful mistress for more than fifty years. Autumn Leaves, Interior Voices, and other poetry increased his reputation. In 1841, on the fourth attempt, he was elected to the French Academy. Three years later he was named a peer of France. He was a member of the Committee of Insurrection during the coup d’état of 1851. When Napoleon III came to power, Hugo, disguised as a peasant, escaped to Brussels. “When liberty returns, I will return,” he said. With his family he moved first to the island of Jersey, then to Guernsey, where Mlle Drouet took a cottage. There he wrote The Contemplations, the first part of Legend of the Centuries, and Les Misérables. Adèle Hugo died in Brussels in 1868. In 1870, after Napoleon III was captured by the Germans, Hugo went back to France. Present at the siege of Paris, he noted in his journal: “Yesterday I ate rat’s meat.” In the ensuing years he published fourteen books, among them The Story of a Crime and Four Winds of the Spirit. His eightieth birthday was a great public triumph. Mlle Drouet died in 1883. Two years later, on May 22, 1885, Hugo followed her. His state funeral was described as an event “in which the corpse presented to the nation became god.” He is buried in the Panthéon. The Battle with the Cannon” is a chapter from Ninety-Three, Hugo’s tale of the French Revolution. Much of the novel seems to have been written in the glassed-in lookout tower of his house on Guernsey. It was published in 1874. From that date on, every reader has remembered the story of the wild gun, not only for the excitement of the incident itself, but for the grim shock of its ending. In Hugo we do not look for the close knowledge of sea life to be found in Dana or Conrad. We are caught by his sense of bold drama, and by the meaning that comes out of it. The twenty-four-pounder (its designation refers ers not to the weight of the gun but to the shot it throws) becomes a living monster, quick and murderous. Loose on the gun deck with a sea making up, it crushes out the life of every man in its way and threatens the ship herself. Into the arena comes the captain of the gun. It is his responsibility. His negligence, in failing to see that it was properly secured, has allowed it to break loose in the first place. He fights this deadly bronze bull with the cunning of a torero. In the end, like the Erymanthian boar conquered by Hercules, it lies bound and overthrown. But at once we are faced with a new crisis. How is this conqueror to be judged? We, like his officers, must answer that question. In this fact lies the true depth of the story. He permitted the gun to go adrift and he has secured it again. By which act must he be judged? Suddenly we are aware that, like Scott’s The Two Drovers and Melville’s Billy Budd, Hugo’s narrative is no mere adventure. We are faced with a problem of justice. In each of these three stories, a man is executed. In each we must make a sorrowful, all but impossible choice. We are asked to choose between the justice of law, which has good sense and some necessity on its side, and what we feel to be the human justice of the case. Nor is this “human justice” altogether—or even largely, perhaps—a matter of feeling. We tend to think of it as broader, finer, and more flexible than the law. It is the balance we strike for the whole situation. Often the law takes little formal notice of what we may call the defendant’s total human worth. Our estimate of that, arbitrary though it may be, is the pivot of our judgment. We wish that Hugo had told us more about the character of his gun captain. We are shocked by the wholly irregular action of Captain Boisberthelot, who hands over a matter of ship’s discipline to the passenger general. Is this a dramatic liberty taken by the author? Or was such a thing actually possible in a revolutionary situation? In any case, we admit the weight of the general’s charges. It is true that the gun captain’s negligence has caused the death of shipmates and put the ship herself in danger. But we are shocked by the general’s decision. First he decorates the gunner and then orders that he be shot. If he had announced both decisions at the same time we might not have been shocked, but in that case the story would have lost much of its dramatic power. In fact, Hugo intends to shock us. He wishes to show us what happens when justice is administered too meticulously.