Author: William Hazlitt William Hazlitt was born at Maidstone, Kent, April 10, 1778. His father, a Unitarian minister and liberal of Irish stock, knew Franklin and favored the American Revolution. In 1783 he moved his family, first to Ireland, then to Philadelphia and Boston. A little later the Hazlitts returned to England. Young William grew up in the peaceful, flowery countryside at Wem in Shropshire, his mind full of the French Revolution, the great event of his time. All his life he remained a hot libertarian who also idolized Napoleon. He was sent to a well-taught Unitarian academy at Hackney. Like Henry and William James, he tried painting first. In Paris, he earned his keep making copies of works at the Louvre. Back in England in 1803, he spent two years as a wandering portrait painter. His self-portrait, solidly painted, shows a gaunt-faced, brooding young man, not unhandsome, with lank black hair and big dark eyes. In 1805 he turned to writing. On the Principles of Human Action and three other books of ideas were published in the next few years. He married Sarah Stoddart, a friend of the Lambs, and went to live at Winterslow. Hazlitt was penniless when his second child was born in 1811. He lectured on philosophy in London and got a job as parliamentary reporter on the Morning Chronicle. He became the paper’s drama critic. A collection of theater articles and two books of his “Round Table” essays made his reputation. He praised the Romantic poets. This brought him under attack by the thunderous William Gifford of the Quarterly Review. Hazlitt replied with all guns, to the delight of Keats and his other friends. He wrote on every subject from art exhibitions to prize fights. His three famous lecture series, including On the English Poets, were gathered into books. Long separated from his wife, he fell in love with Sarah Walker, the daughter of his London landlord. She played him off against another man. He wrote the story, somewhat disguised, in Liber Amoris, a book that English critics found distasteful. Hazlitt married again later, traveled in France and Italy, and wrote a four-volume life of Napoleon. His best-known later work, The Spirit of the Age, contained studies of the leading men of his time. He died of cancer of the stomach in London on September 18, 1830. Up to 1820 the name of Wordsworth was trampled underfoot,” said De Quincey; and the same was true of Coleridge. Why? Because they had made a revolution in poetry, and because at that time they supported the French Revolution. Hazlitt met them first in 1798, when he was twenty. A quarter-century later, in My First Acquaintance with Poets, he recovers the excitement of that youthful time when a new poetry and a new age were born together. We see Coleridge, the big, “round-faced man in black,” in the character of a Unitarian clergyman, preaching a sermon as vivid as Father Mapple’s in Melville. Later, with young Hazlitt, we go on a visit to Coleridge. Walking, of course—what are legs for?—we arrive at Nether Stowey, a “green and hilly” place near the sea. With Dorothy Wordsworth we eat the plain supper of poets and a day or two later get our first view of that other great man, William Wordsworth, “gaunt and Don Quixote-like” in his “brown fustian jacket and striped pantaloons.” Hazlitt and Coleridge held nearly opposite opinions of Swift as a poet. But Coleridge, even in his later falling out with Hazlitt, must have found Hazlitt’s essay On Swift a generally admirable piece of work. Hazlitt shows a sound understanding of the color and depth of Swift’s moralism. He sees that it is central to Swift’s work. And he gives us here the best and truest image of Swift as a writer: a jealously irritable father out of patience with “that great baby the world.” In Of Persons One Would Wish to Have Seen, Hazlitt leads us up three flights to an evening party at the rooms of Charles Lamb in Mitre-Court, London. The picture has its own snug charm. The host is there, and his sister Mary, here called “Mrs. Reynolds.” Others who take part in the conversation are William Ayrton, musician and critic; John Rickman, political economist; Erasmus Phillips, his secretary; Fanny Burney’s brother, Captain James Burney, and his son Martin; Barron Field, critic and lawyer; and George Dyer, poet. William Godwin, novelist and political writer, also appears to be present, but silent. The “Eugene Aram” mentioned by Hazlitt was a philologist hanged for murder, later the subject of a novel by Edward Bulwer-Lytton. The “Lord Brooke” of whom Lamb speaks has been named earlier as Fulke Greville, Elizabethan poet and statesman. Which two persons now dead would we like to have seen? We have a century and a half of famous names to add to Hazlitt’s list. Lincoln and Jenny Lind? Sun Yat-sen and Vincent Van Gogh? Or Emily Dickinson and Buffalo Bill?