Author: Walt Whitman Walt Whitman (Walter Whitman, Jr., in full) came of English, Welsh, and Dutch stock. He was born on the family farm in Huntington, Long Island, New York, May 31, 1819. In the early 1820’s, his family moved to Brooklyn, where Whitman got a little schooling. He spent a leisurely youth teaching in country districts on Long Island and working as a newspaper printer and writer. By 1846 he was editing the Brooklyn Daily Eagle. A few months with a New Orleans newspaper gave him a chance to explore the Mississippi Valley en route. In Brooklyn again, he began to meditate the poems for Leaves of Grass. This great book became the focus of his life. In 1855, almost singlehanded, he set and printed the first edition. “I greet you at the beginning of a great career,” Emerson wrote; but the book went largely unread. From early 1863 until the end of the Civil War, Whitman served as a volunteer nurse, letter writer, and friend in the national hospitals at Washington, D.C. Later he estimated that he made 600 visits and talked to as many as 100,000 sick or wounded, both Union and Confederate. As the author of “an indecent book,” he was discharged from the Department of the Interior in 1865. His friend W.D.O’Connor defended his name in The Good Gray Poet and found him another place in the Attorney General’s office. There Whitman worked until he was partly disabled by a cerebral hemorrhage in 1873. Meantime his Selected Poems had been brought out in England. He published a fifth enlarged edition of Leaves of Grass. A prose work, Democratic Vistas, conveyed his vision of America’s prospects and liabilities. Except for trips to Colorado and Canada, he spent most of his later years in Camden, New Jersey. There friends—John Burroughs, Horace Traubel, Dr. R.M.Bucke, and an English admirer, Mrs. Anne Gilchrist—gathered about him. In his last days he edited the ninth edition of Leaves of Grass and his Complete Prose Works. Weakened by pneumonia, he died in Camden of a complication of illnesses on March 26, 1892. Let us imagine for a moment that we are Walt Whitman. The year is 1855. He has sold a house to get money for the first publication of Leaves of Grass. He is thirty-six, a calm, big-boned man whose hair is already turning gray. He has written a propaganda novel in favor of temperance, edited a few newspapers, and published some sentimental verses. By common standards he is a nobody, but a very self-reliant nobody, “one full-sized man unconquerable and simple.” He lives a ferry ride away from the most energetic city in the bustling new nation of the United States. This is the man—this nobody, this farmer’s son from Long Island—who announces calmly out of the blue, in his first book, that he has elected himself the poet of American democracy, with options on the world and the universe. Even if it were a hoax, this would be the boldest act in the history of American literature. But it is not a hoax. It is a serene act of genius. He gives us the evidence in verse, plus an argument in prose. We cannot help noticing that the claim is not purely literary. It is also philosophical, social, and political. It demands for the poet—for Whitman himself, and for the poets who will come after him—the most exalted position, as lawgiver, seer, creator of the future, and delegate of the “divine average,” the free individual. As if this were not enough, the poems in Leaves of Grass break all the rules. They shock the literary reader, who expects meter and rhymed endings. Their frankness violates the provincial conventions of the period. With two or three exceptions, the result is outrage. One reviewer calls Whitman “the poet who brought the slop-pail into the parlor.” And what does Whitman do? He tries to promote the book. When it will not be promoted, he goes calmly about the business of preparing a second, expanded edition. But the mystery remains. How did this man suddenly produce this book? We know that in the years between his journey to New Orleans and 1855, something has happened to Whitman. We do not know what. Perhaps he does not know himself. Perhaps it is only that all his lines of development have come together f or the first time in the bold speeches of his poems. The answer, if we can find it anywhere, may be found in the Preface he wrote for Leaves of Grass. It is infused with a sense of mission. In it Whitman speaks in the tone of a man who has experienced a religious conversion. He has fallen in love with the universe and found his true relation to it. His voice is the voice of a great ethical teacher: “Love the earth and sun and the animals, despise riches, give alms to every one that asks, stand up for the stupid and crazy, devote your income and labor to others, hate tyrants, argue not concerning God….” Do these things, he writes, and “your very flesh shall be a great poem….”