Author: Ernest Hemingway Ernest Hemingway was born in Oak Park, Illinois, July 21, 1899. In high school, he made the football and swimming teams and served as class editor. He became a reporter on the Kansas City Star. In early 1918, he joined an American ambulance unit on the Italian front. Wounded by a trench mortar grenade near Piave, he spent three months in a hospital. He enlisted in the Italian infantry and was commissioned a lieutenant in the field. After World War I, Hemingway worked for the Toronto Star and the Chicago Tribune. In 1921 he married Hadley Richardson and went back to Europe as a correspondent. His first book, Three Stor ies and Ten Poems, appeared in 1923. The following year he published in our time (it was succeeded by an expanded version, In Our Time, in 1925). “You are all a lost generation,” Gertrude Stein said to him; and this became the legend for his famous first novel, The Sun Also Rises. A book of stories, Men Without Women, was followed by A Fare well to Arms in 1929. This novel clinched his enormous reputation. He was divorced, married Pauline Pfeiffer, and moved to Key West, Florida. He fished the Gulf Stream (a rosefish, Neomerinthe hem ingwayi, has been named after him). In the early 1930’s, he published a book in praise of bullfighting, Death in the Afternoon; a third collection of stories, Winner Take Nothing; and Green Hills of Africa, a narrative of big-game hunting. His fourth novel, To Have and Have Not, was brought out in 1937. Out of his experience as a correspondent in the Spanish Civil War came The Fifth Column, a play; the narration for Joris Ivens’ motion picture, The Spanish Earth; and in 1940 his most popular novel, For Whom the Bell Tolls. He was divorced, married Martha Gellhorn, and settled in Cuba. During World War II, he took part in the Normandy invasion as a correspondent and entered Paris somewhat in advance of the main body of troops. He was divorced in 1944 and married Mary Welsh. A sixth novel appeared in 1950. Three years later, The Old Man and the Sea was awarded a Pulitzer Prize. Hemingway received the 1954 Nobel Prize for literature. His clear and powerful style and his devotion to the elemental simplicities of being earned him a world audience. He died from a gunshot wound in Ketchum, Idaho, on July 2, 1961. The Killers is one of Hemingway’s earlier stories and belongs among his most famous. It creates a representative incident from that almost unbelievable memory, the world of prohibition America in the 1920’s, and puts it down for us in its own living terms. Even if we have never known such a world, we are persuaded—for the term of the story, at least—to live in it. We feel the chill, quiet autumn evening in a small town and catch the warm smell of ham and eggs frying in the lunchroom. The tone is true, the people are as such people would be, the speech is faithful. Hemingway did not invent this speech. He listened to it and refined it into a formal style. Who are the killers of the title? Do we need to be told that they are members of a criminal gang, or hired professionals, detailed to murder a man who has in some way offended against the gangland code? In the argot of the period, they would be called torpedoes or rods or trigger men. We gather at once, from their clothes and speech, and especially from their contempt for the town of Summit, that they are big-city men. They look “like a vaudeville team” and they talk like partners in a vaudeville act. Their idiom is a coarse irony, sharpened here and there with wit. Its purpose is intimidation. They eat with their gloves on. Professional killers do not leave fingerprints. Their mere presence is an eruption of drama in the twilight dol drums of the small town. It is as if a squad of enemy soldiers had moved in and set up a machine-gun post. This suggests one of the remarkable virtues of the story: that it defines precisely, in one symbolic incident, the relation of the gangs to ordinary American life in the 1920’s. George, Nick, and Sam behave as any ordinary people might under the circumstances. They do what they are told, in the expectation that, if they do, they will not be hurt. Later, when Nick promises to go and see Andreson, Sam voices the typical attitude in such a situation. “You better not have anything to do with it at all,” Sam says. “You better stay way out of it.” The story achieves great intensity at the end, even though the ending seems to dissolve or drift away. Here Hemingway shows his extraordinary ability to suggest emotion with such homely details as the false tranquillity of an arc light among bare branches. Young Nick Adams’ courage, his horror at the trap, his willingness to help—all these stand baffled before the great hulk on the bed in Mrs. Hirsch’s rooming house.