Author: Rudyard Kipling Rudyard Kipling was born in Bombay, India, December 30, 1865. His father, an artist, was later curator of the Lahore Museum. Young Kipling attended the United Services College, North Devon, England. At seventeen he went back to India and joined the staff of the Lahore Civil and Military Gazette. Four years later he published a book of fresh and skillful light verse, Departmental Ditties. In 1887 his first fiction, Plain Tales from the Hills, appeared. He produced Soldiers Three, The Phantom ’Rickshaw, Wee Willie Winkie, and other stories in the next two years. Between 1887 and 1889 he traveled through India, China, Japan, and the United States. In England his newborn fame had preceded him. He married Caroline Starr Balestier in 1892, honeymooned in Japan, and lived for the next four years in Brattleboro, Vermont. Later he settled in England. His first long fiction, The Light That Failed, published in 1891 and dramatized in 1905, was not regarded as his most impressive work. Barrack Room Ballads, many of which had first appeared in the National Observer, came out in 1892. Solidly turned and full of energy, they were largely written in the slang of British soldiers in India. They brought Kipling a whole new audience. In them two of his cardinal interests first strongly emerged: his intelligent concern with machinery and how it affects human beings, and his role as the revivalist preacher of British imperialism. The stories in Many Inventions were followed by The Jungle Book (see below) in 1894. Almost immediately came The Second Jungle Book. During the nineties and the early part of the century, he published Captains Courageous, Stalky and Co., Kim, Just So Stories, The Five Nations, Puck of Pook’s Hill, and other works. His most famous poem, Recessional, appeared in The Times of London on Queen Victoria’s second jubilee in 1897. He made several trips to South Africa and visited New York for the last time in 1899. Kipling was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature in 1907. He died in London on January 18, 1936. The story of the child who grows up in a wild state is old in legend and perhaps in fact. Romulus and Remus, the mythical founders of Rome, were said to have been suckled by a she-wolf. The discovery of the Wild Boy of Aveyron once caused a sensation in France. Even as late as March, 1959, the Times of India reported that a six-year-old boy named Parasram had been found at a water hole and brought back to his parents. He was said to have lived with wolves for four and a half years. Scientists discredited this, though the boy did eat raw meat without picking it up and drank at streams in a manner typical of wolves. But we need no such possibly factual parallels to be enchanted by Mowgli’s Brothers. The story follows a traditional form. That form was the animal fable. In the hands of such writers as Aesop, Chaucer, La Fontaine, and Lessing it had become a moral vehicle. In Kipling the moral touch is not lacking, but essentially his stories go back to such primitive animal tales as those of the Tewa Indians, Hottentots, Finns, Australasians, and to those of India itself. They share the two chief characteristics of the animal fable: in act and speech the animals take on human qualities, but they retain their own animal traits. We see this clearly in the first sharp dramatic moment of Mow gli’s Brothers, in the passage that begins: “And it is I, Raksha [the Demon] who answer….” We are clinched. We have no choice but to go on with the story. We have seen Mother Wolf as the conventional suckler of cubs. Now suddenly, her eyes “like two green moons,” she changes into a fury. First, there is the rasp of the name itself, Raksha, its given meaning, and the magnificent hard rage of her speech. But it is the sense of the speech that catches us. On the surface, this is anger and contempt for Shere Khan the tiger, “hunter of little naked cubs.” In that phrase its true meaning lies. Raksha becomes for us not only the human mother whom Mowgli has lost but all immemorial animal mothers raging in defense of their young. And what else do we feel? That Mowgli is not her cub, that he is the young of enemies. So we can measure the greatness of her generosity. We are a little amused at Father Wolf’s astonishment. He sees her again as the dangerous young she-wolf that he had fought five other males to get. And finally, we know that the situation is established. Mowgli has been adopted into his wild family.