Author: Nikolai Gogol Nikolai Gogol was born in Sorochintsky, Russia, March 31, 1809. His family were Ukrainian Cossack landowners. In St. Petersburg at the end of the 1820’s, Gogol tried the theater and poetry. He resolved to emigrate to America. He got as far as Lübeck, Germany, then turned back to St. Petersburg and found a job in the civil service. In 1831–32, the two volumes of his Evenings on a Farm Near Dikanka, a reworking of Ukrainian folk stories, made him famous at once. He planned an eight- or nine-volume history of medieval Russia, never written. He was given a chair in history at the University of St. Petersburg, but resigned in 1835. During this period he published Arabesques and Cossack Tales, which included the renowned Taras Bulba, an account of the Cossack wars with Poles and Tartars in the sixteenth century. His best-known short story, The Over coat (see below), also appeared at this time. Gogol’s great comedy, The Inspector-General, was first produced on April 19, 1836. This satire on officialdom has been translated into many languages and made into an American motion picture. Gogol spoke of Italy as his “true homeland.” He spent most of the years between 1836 and 1848 in Rome, though he hardly strayed from the Russian colony there. In Rome he wrote the famous comic novel, Dead Souls, published in 1842. This chronicle of a promoter who travels about Russia buying up the credentials of dead serfs becomes a mocking parade of Russian provincial types and customs. His second comedy for the stage, Marriage, was also written during his time in Italy. Back in Russia, he found himself the hero of the reformers. Like Tolstoy in his later years, Gogol began to regard himself as a moral missionary. He wrote a sequel to Dead Souls, in which the quick-witted promoter was redeemed, but destroyed it. When he published Selected Passages from a Correspondence With Friends, he was charged with “falsifying Christianity for the profit of those in power.” He made a melancholy pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Later he fell under the domination of a fanatic priest, Father Matthew Konstantinovsky, who convinced him that fiction was sinful. Gogol burned some of his manuscripts. He died on February 21, 1852. Akaky Akakievich, the antihero who becomes at last the hero of The Overcoat, is at once completely Russian and completely universal. We know him. Perhaps, worse luck, we have even been him. He is all but immemorial. He is the man at the bottom of the ladder in every business and government office—the least essential and the first to go, to be replaced by the manager’s cousin or a new machine. No doubt he or his ancestors existed in the ancient bureaucracies of Egypt and China. His descendants, men or more likely women, sit in the office chairs of Paris and New York. Gogol caught him once and for all with the skill of a great sociologist joined to the mastery of a great writer of fiction. This Akaky, this little man of the cities, came late to literature, but he came with a rush. We can find him under a dozen names in Balzac and Dickens and Zola and Dostoevsky. He is the obdurate old copyist of Wall Street in Melville’s Bartleby the Scrivener. He is the terrified clerk in Kafka’s The Metamorphosis. Indeed, without ever having given a thought to such things, he has become a world figure. He is the consumer. Advertisements are written for him. He is the man in the street. Candidates for office speak well of him and solicit his vote. But we need not be grandiose. He is Akaky, a simple man who has a simple problem. He needs a new overcoat. Gogol tells us about it as informally as a friend we had happened to meet, a good-hearted friend who knows very well that the story is both pitiful and comic. We see Akaky working in his office, the butt of the young clerks, who call his worn-out overcoat “the old dressing gown.” We see him at home, gulping his cabbage soup. Even there he gets out the inkwell and copies a document “for his own pleasure.” He works “with love.” He is happy. And little by little it comes to us that Akaky is a “fool of God,” a small saint in an icon, a man too simplehearted for the mere act of living, so that he goes about with melon rinds on his hat and wakes up in the middle of the street with a horse’s nose thrust against his face. So we are pleased at how neatly he and his friend Petrovich the tailor solve the problem of a new overcoat. Like Akaky himself, we are “bubbling with good spirits” when he first puts it on. But we know that this little splendor will not last. Wrong from the start, when no one could find a name for him and he was forced to borrow his father’s, Akaky has no luck. We are not surprised at that brutal night scene in the square so wide it was “like being in the middle of the sea.” We only hope, for an instant, that these are his office friends, playing a trick on him. We witness the rage of “the important personage,” and Akaky’s death. Yes, we say. That is how it would be. But at the same time, we are struck by the sadness of the human condition.