Author: Robert Louis Stevenson Robert Louis Stevenson was born in Edinburgh, November 13, 1850. At sixteen he entered Edinburgh University. He was expected to follow the family profession, lighthouse engineering. He compromised on the law. Like Scott, he was admitted to the bar. But he trained himself for literature from boyhood on. From the first his health was delicate. The evidence suggests that his ailment was not tuberculosis but probably a case of fibrinous bronchitis that involved frequent and dangerous hemorrhages. Trips to the Continent gave him materials for An Inland Voyage and Travels with a Donkey in the Cevennes. At Fontainebleau in 1876 he met Fanny Vandegrift Osbourne, an American woman separated from her husband. When she went back to California two years later, Stevenson followed and, after a divorce, married her. Across the Plains and The Silverado Squatters describe that episode. In 1880 the Stevensons went to Scotland. There were various pilgrimages, always in search of a kinder climate, to Davos in Switzerland, the Scottish Highlands, Provence, and Bournemouth in England. In the 1880’s, despite many illnesses, he wrote the immortal Treasure Island, and also The Black Arrow, Prince Otto, A Child’s Garden of Verses, and Kidnapped. The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, published in 1886, made him a broadly popular writer for the first time. A year later the Stevensons left Europe for good. After a stay at Saranac in New York State, they returned to California and chartered the schooner yacht Casco, out of San Francisco, for a cruise to the Marquesas, the Paumotus, Tahiti, and Hawaii. At Waikiki, Stevenson finished The Master of Ballantrae, published in 1889. He visited the leper colony on Molokai and wrote a fiery defense of Father Damien, the lepers’ priest. In 1889 a second trip, aboard the copra schooner Equator, took him to the Gilbert Islands and Samoa. There were later voyages to Sydney and to the other islands. The Stevensons settled in Samoa. He became what he would have called a bonnet laird and the Samoans called a matai—that is, “a small landed proprietor.” He was given the island name of Tusitala (Storyteller). Here he wrote In the South Seas, still one of the best books about that region; David Balfour, The Ebb-Tide, and the unfinished Weir of Hermiston. He died of a cerebral hemorrhage on December 3, 1894. J.B.Priestley describes a novel about a man who is “both a murderer and a bewildered innocent, divided between extreme evil and goodness.” The novel is Dickens’ last book, The Mystery of Edwin Drood, but it might just as well have been Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, written some fifteen years later. Stevenson may well have been amused at the number of interpretations the critics found for his story. It was evidently a mirror for every mind. Let us see how many aspects we can discover in it. (1) It is a Victorian thriller, and a good one. It can be read—very pleasurably too—on that level alone. It belongs high up in the Victorian mystery tradition of Wilkie Collins and the later Dickens, who learned from Collins. It is melodrama, but melodrama that expands into other meanings. The anarchic violence of the beast-man Hyde is played off against what seemed the immovable stability of upper middle-class London. And what artful storytelling it is! Centripetal in structure, it coils in on the center until at last we are admitted to Dr. Jekyll’s laboratory, the birthplace of the mystery. Even then, in Jekyll’s statement, we are allowed one final intimacy. We learn from his own words what he did and how it felt. (2) Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde is also psychological melodrama. We know that Stevenson had been much impressed by Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment. He had been reading French and English psychiatric literature. The idea of split personality—that is, of the individual who seems to comprise two or more fairly distinct personalities—must have struck him as a godsend. He saw what dramatic use it could be put to in literature. But he was careful to make it doubly plausible by introducing the idea of a drug that would bring about the change from one personality to another. Science fiction (and Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde is that, among other things) has often predicted new turns in science. Thus we now have real drugs capable of producing something like the same effect as Dr. Jekyll’s imaginary potion. But Stevenson did not invent the figure we have come to call the Mad Scientist. He is at least as old as the medieval alchemists or Dr. Frankenstein. He appears again in Hawthorne’s Rappaccini’s Daughter. (3) Like Pilgrim’s Progress, Stevenson’s tale is an allegory about the moral nature of man. Or rather, the moral nature of Western man. It revolves on the paired and opposed ideas of good and evil, respectively and boldly symbolized in Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. But Jekyll’s nature contains both elements. Hyde is purely evil. Perhaps we might be more convinced of this if Stevenson had persuaded us by suggestion, as his friend Henry James did in The Turn of the Screw. Hyde’s explosive brutality creates the effect of mental illness rather than calculated evil. Even so, he is frightening enough.