Author: Richard Sheridan Richard Brinsley Butler Sheridan was born in Dublin October 30, 1751. His father, Thomas, was an actor. Richard went to Harrow when he was eleven years old, where he studied for six years. By 1771 the Sheridan family had moved to Bath. There Sheridan met Elizabeth Ann Linley, the beautiful 16-year-old daughter of a composer. After a romantic courtship, the two were married, in 1773, and went to live in London. Although the young couple had no income, they took a house in a fashionable neighborhood and began to live far beyond their means. Sheridan, who had previously collaborated in writing one play, now turned seriously to writing as a means of living. The Rivals, produced on January 17, 1775, was an instant success. In June, 1776, Sheridan bought a share of the Drury Lane Theater, where The School for Scandal was produced the following year. It, too, was extremely popular, drawing large houses. The Critic was produced in 1779. This was the last of Sheridan’s important plays. From then on, his life was devoted to politics. He entered Parliament in 1780 and soon became famous as the best orator of the time. His last years were filled with disappointments, and he was always heavily in debt. His wife died in 1792, and he remarried in 1795. In 1812 he failed to be re-elected to Parliament. Shortly before, the Drury Lane Theater had burned. He died July 7, 1816, very poor, but was buried with great ceremony in Westminster Abbey. The School for Scandal is a comedy of manners, one of the best, if not the best, of its kind in English. Comedies of manners had become very popular in the Restoration period in England, as part of the general joyous heel-kicking reaction against the strict Puritanism of the Cromwells. When Englishmen welcomed Charles II back from France, they welcomed the French influence in cultural matters as well, especially in the drama. Molière was the literary hero of the day. The first plays to appear in the newly reopened English theaters ridiculed all aspects of Puritan morality. Their subject matter was the flirtations and intrigues of sophisticated society. Their heroes were glib-talking dandies; their heroines beautiful flirts. If Restoration comedy writers added little to a profound understanding of human nature, they vividly pictured the customs and atmosphere of their world and in doing so wrote some very amusing plays. English drama, from the beginning of the Restoration in the middle 1600’s gradually became more sentimental and superficial until Sheridan, near the end of the eighteenth century, gave England the last great examples of Restoration comedy in The Rivals and The School for Scandal. The “School” of Sheridan’s play is a fashionable society of clever but intellectually limited people whose favorite entertainment is slander. Sheridan’s thesis might be expressed as “the devil finds work for idlers’ tongues.” Because he was picturing a society rather than individuals, Sheridan was content to use stock characters which would have been easily recognizable to English playgoers of his time. Charles Surface is the impulsive but basically good young man. Joseph is the pretender whose efforts to keep up a good appearance lead to his downfall. Lady Teazle is the discontented young woman who has married for money. Sir Peter Teazle is the illusioned old man who expects to be appreciated for himself rather than his possessions. Out of these materials—a stock cast, an unlikely plot, and such stage conventions as asides—Sheridan makes a hilarious and essentially moral play. His most effective tool is the sparkling dialogue, packed with epigrams, that was so highly prized in the drawing rooms of his day. Sheridan could mix a pun with an epigram and produce a revealing truth as few dramatists have been able to do; for example, “I never think them [my friends] in such danger as when Candour undertakes their defence.” There are two great scenes in The School for Scandal—the auction of the family portraits, and the scandal-hiding screen—which a lesser talent would have reduced to slapstick. Under Sheridan’s touch, however, they are so effective that they have been rightfully famous for over 180 years. The two foibles, scandal and extravagance, which The School for Scandal exposes, were chosen by Sheridan to epitomize the temper of upper-class society as he saw it. But behind these lies the hypocrisy of the upper classes—and this is the evil that the play most powerfully attacks.