Author: Mark Twain Descended from a line of westward-moving Virginians who “never forgot that they were gentry,” Samuel Langhorne Clemens was born November 30, 1835, in Florida, Missouri. Four years later the family moved to Hannibal, Missouri. This small town on the Mississippi would be Sam Clemens’ great magic place, the scene of Tom Sawyer and The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. His father died in 1847. The tallish, sandy-haired boy with the sharp, gray-blue eyes stayed in school for a while (he got little enough of it) and became an apprentice printer in Hannibal. In 1853 his wanderings began. As a journeyman printer he worked in St. Louis, New York City, and Philadelphia, and later on his brother Orion’s paper in Iowa. On a trip down the Mississippi in 1856, he managed to get himself taken on as an apprentice pilot. He followed the lordly trade of river-boat piloting until the Civil War all but ended traffic in 1861. That year he spent “an inglorious few weeks” in the Confederate militia. Then he joined his brother Orion on a trip to Nevada Territory, tried timber speculation and silver mining, and got a job as a feature writer on the Virginia City Territorial Enterprise. From an old fellow pilot on the river he borrowed his pen name, Mark Twain (a leadsman’s call meaning two fathoms—safe or bold water). Mov ing to San Francisco in 1864, he worked for the Call and contributed to Bret Harte’s Californian. The story of Jim Smiley and his jumping frog, printed in New York, gave him his first national notice. When he got back from a voyage to Hawaii, a trial or two in San Francisco convinced him that he could do well at lecturing. Twain took ship by way of the isthmus for New York. There, in 1867, he published his first book, The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County, and Other Sketches. That same year he traveled in Europe and the Holy Land, sending back articles that would later grow into Innocents Abroad. His name was made. He married Olivia Langdon in 1870 and after a stay in Buffalo, New York, he lived in Hartford, Connecticut, until 1891, then in Europe, Redding, Connecticut, and New York City. About 1893 the failure of his business speculations sent him on a lecture tour around the world. With the proceeds from this trip and two new books, Twain, like Defoe, paid off his creditors to the last dollar. His most famous books—Tom Sawyer, Huckleberry Finn, Life on the Mississippi, The Prince and the Pauper, A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court, and others—were written in the 1870’s and 1880’s. He died on April 21, 1910. Twain began as a humorist of the old frontier school and grew into a satirist. Toward the end of his life, the satire turned almost as grim as Swift’s. The Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg was published in 1900 and thus belongs among his later works. Like Henry Adams and Walt Whitman, he watched the America he had known vanish after the Civil War. He detested the coarse scramble for money that accompanied the expansion of the 1870’s and 1880’s. He saw what this had done to the old American sense of community. “Hadleyburg” is the other side of Tom Sawyer, as cynical as the earlier book is idealized. Notice that when Twain set out to show the corruption of a small town, he did it in terms of money. This was his sense of what had happened to America; but only an American writer would conceive of attitudes toward money as central to morality. Even Balzac might have been a little startled at a whole community of swindlers. What? Not one honest man or woman in the whole town of Hadleyburg? Or only one? But the story, of course, is satire, and takes the liberties of satire. Twain’s mastery makes us believe it. It has as many turns of plot as a Chinese drama. Each time we think we have come to the last door, another opens in front of us; and each door reveals some harshly comic spectacle of human weakness or greed, hypocrisy or betrayal. We witness the moral death of a community in which every value is reversed and even well-meant actions have cruel effects. Is this Twain’s judgment on morality itself? In the end, nothing is changed but the name of the town and its motto. In the old motto, lead us not into temptation, one word has been left out.