Author: George Bernard Shaw George Bernard Shaw was born in Dublin, on July 26, 1856. His father, George Carr Shaw, was an unsuccessful corn merchant and an alcoholic. His mother was a talented musician, who taught Shaw, at an early age, to love and understand music. Shaw had very little formal education. When he was ten he went to Wesleyan Connexional School, later Wesley College, in Dublin; four years later, he began work as a clerk in a land agent’s office. He hated the work as much as he had previously hated school, and in 1876 he left Dublin for London. There his mother supported him by giving music lessons while Shaw wrote five novels which for some time he could not get published. In 1885 Shaw began to write criticism, reviewing books and later music and drama for periodicals. His opinions were often startling to his readers. He championed Wagner, who was then new and unpopular. He attacked Shakespeare, partly for the shock value of it, and partly to gain recognition of Ibsen, whose work he admired. Shaw’s The Quintessence of Ibsenism was published in 1891. When he was twenty-six, Shaw became a socialist. He later said that the reading of Marx’s Capital was the turning point in his life. Shaw joined the Fabian Society in 1884 and was soon a popular speaker on socialism. Shaw’s socialist opinions formed the basis for several of his plays, including the first one, Widowers Houses, produced in 1892. It dealt with the evils of slum landlords. This play encountered violent criticism which, typically, convinced Shaw that he was meant to be a dramatist. His first critical success was Candida, produced in 1897. With the money The Devil’s Disciple made in the United States in 1900, Shaw was freed from the necessity of writing criticism for a living. In 1898 he married Charlotte Payne-Townshend, a wealthy Irish woman and a fellow Fabian. Shaw had many unusual convictions, and he delighted in championing causes that were unpopular in his time, such as socialism and feminism. He was a life-long vegetarian and an anti-vivisectionist. He attacked compulsory vaccination and was scornful of doctors. He advocated the acceptance of a new alphabet. Shaw presented many of his controversial ideas in his plays and the sometimes lengthy introductions to them. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature in 1925. With the prize money he set up the Anglo-Swedish Literary Alliance. He refused both a knighthood and the Order of Merit. In his long lifetime he wrote more than fifty plays. He died November 2, 1950, at his home at Ayot St. Lawrence, Hertfordshire, England. G.B.S. (as he was often called) was, among other things, an enemy of complacency. He delighted in shocking people, in stinging them out of their calmly accepted, conventional ideas. Few controversial subjects escaped the sharp attack of his wit. Religion, war, evolution, philanthropy—these are only a few of the topics on which he turned the bright light of his attention. His greatest delight was to shock the English. He loved to take one of their common prejudices and turn it upside down. In his battle against English complacency, he used three powerful weapons—paradox, irony, and humor. All are evident in the drama that is reprinted here. The Man of Destiny was first produced in 1897. Think back to that time. It is before World War I, before Mussolini, Hitler, and Stalin, before World War II and the Cold War. For most Englishmen the embodiment of all political evil was Napoleon. He had been dead for seventy-five years, but he was still the arch villain. He was the epitome of violence, of autocracy, of treachery. He was all that is un-English. He was a figure to frighten children and foreign offices.He was as close to being the devil incarnate as anyone ever was. Yet Shaw, for an English audience, makes Napoleon the hero of his play. Here is the young leader, only two days after the Battle of Lodi. It was at Lodi that Napoleon first caught the attention of Europe. Overnight his name became one to conjure with. Shaw depicts him, indeed, as ruthless, ambitious, cruel. But there is no doubt that he is a hero. What kind of man is Shaw’s Napoleon? He is more than ambitious and cruel. He is also cunning, shrewd, and intelligent. Shaw would not permit the arch villain to appear stupid. It is the English, Shaw seems to be saying, who are the dull, stupid ones. Yet the English, he also is saying, finally defeated Napoleon. How could that be? Napoleon himself, in the play, explains this. “The English are a race apart,” he says. When an Englishman “wants a thing, he never tells himself that he wants it. He waits patiently until there comes into his mind, no one knows how, a burning conviction that it is his moral and religious duty to conquer those who possess the thing he wants. Then he becomes irresistible.” The Englishman, Napoleon adds, “is never at a loss for an effective moral attitude.” And he goes on to recount all the hypocrisies that underlie English life and opinion. Paradox is piled on paradox in this play. Napoleon comes close to outwitting himself with his own cunning. The Lady is equally shrewd, but she too is defeated in the end. Only the English, with their invulnerable “effective moral attitude,” are victorious. Thus the play attacks not only English complacency with respect to Napoleon, but also English hypocrisy. The English never see anything clearly, Shaw appears to be saying. They are constantly fooling themselves. At heart, they are exactly what they say Napoleon is; that is, ruthless, grasping, and ambitious. Napoleon in the play, on the other hand, has some of the virtues the English claim to have but really do not: chivalry toward women, for instance. Above all, Shaw’s Napoleon delights in conversation. He delights to match verbal wits with people. The Lieutenant, who may stand in the play for the English, cannot keep up with him. His ignorance is invincible. The Lady pleases Napoleon because she tries to outwit him. The English never tried to outwit Napoleon; they simply defeated him. “It is even now impossible to live in England without sometimes feeling how much that country lost in not being conquered by him,” says Shaw in his introduction to the play. The English, in other words, could have learned something from Napoleon, but they refused to do so. They thought they knew everything already. Shaw admired strong men—what some of his contemporaries called “supermen.” He wrote a play about Julius Caesar that portrayed him as having many of the characteristics that Napoleon has in this play: wit, cunning, a knowledge of human nature. But Shaw admired the English, too, even though he never stopped making fun of them. He decried their moral denseness, their hypocrisy, their pompous conceit. Yet they were, for Shaw, a nation to be reckoned with. They were “a race apart.” In his heart he loved them. It should be remembered that Shaw himself was not English but Irish. England was his adopted country, but he never ceased to view it with the wry understanding of his native land. And Napoleon says one thing that may be the key to Shaw’s view of the English. The Lady admits that her grandmother was Irish. “Yes: I forgot the Irish,” Napoleon replies. “An English army led by an Irish general: that might be a match for a French army led by an Italian general.” The Duke of Wellington, who defeated Napoleon at Waterloo, was, in fact, an Irishman. But the impression we have is that Shaw is here talking about himself. And that is the most delicate, and delicious, irony of all.