Author: Thomas Stearns Eliot Thomas Stearns Eliot was born in St. Louis, Missouri, on September 26, 1888. His grandfather had founded the city’s first Unitarian Church, as well as Washington University. His father was a successful businessman. Tom, a serious, bookish boy, was the youngest of seven children. Eliot went to Smith Academy in St. Louis and Milton Academy near Boston. He entered Harvard when he was eighteen. A brilliant, hard-working student, he finished his undergraduate work in three years and took a master’s degree in the fourth year. The teachers who had the greatest influence on him were George Santayana, Irving Babbitt, and Bertrand Russell. He spent a year studying at the Sorbonne in Paris, where he wrote his first important poem, The Love Song of J.Alfred Prufrock. He returned to Harvard and continued his study of philosophy. In 1914 Eliot won a traveling scholarship and went to Germany. When World War I broke out, he left for England, where, except for a few intervals, he lived the rest of his life. In England Eliot worked first as a teacher, then as a banker, devoting his evenings to study and writing. Later he became an editor in a publishing firm. Bertrand Russell introduced him to the Bloomsbury group, who immediately recognized him as a talented writer. Leonard and Virginia Woolf published The Waste Land, often said to be the most influential English poem of the twentieth century, at the Hogarth Press in 1922. In 1927 Eliot became a British citizen and was confirmed in the Anglican Church. In 1928 he published For Lancelot Andrewes, a volume of essays in which he first publicly stated his belief in Anglo-Catholicism. Most of the poems, such as Ash Wednesday (1930), and the verse plays he later wrote reflect his religious attitude and his association with a traditional culture. One of his greatest achievements as a poet was Four Quartets, published in 1943. Eliot’s first wife, Vivienne Haigh-Wood, died in 1947. In 1957 he married Esmé Valerie Fletcher. He died in London on January 4, 1965. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature in 1948. He received honorary degrees from many of the world’s leading universities, as well as Britain’s highest honor, the Order of Merit. In an often quoted statement, Eliot described himself as “classicist in literature, royalist in politics, Anglo-Catholic in religion.” Two of these attitudes—classicist and Anglo-Catholic—are illustrated in these essays. “Dante and Shakespeare divide the modern world between them,” Eliot writes. He goes on to indicate what seems to him the difference between them. “Shakespeare,” he says, “gives the greatest width of human passion; Dante the greatest altitude and greatest depth.” The range of Shakespeare is, indeed, wider than that of any poet. Eliot in his essay on Dante attempts to show us, by following Dante in his journey from Hell to Heaven, how the Italian poet plumbs deeper depths, and scales greater heights, than Shakespeare could reach. His argument is persuasive. Dante, Eliot says, is easy to read. Easy, that is, in the way in which Eliot believes that all good poetry is easy—it can communicate before it is understood. This sounds like a paradox, as indeed it is. Eliot means that Dante’s Divine Comedy has a first, an immediate, meaning for every reader. It is a story that is comprehensible to all. The Divine Comedy is also, as Eliot points out, an allegory. It is, he says, “one vast metaphor.” The full understanding of the meaning of the metaphor is, Eliot suggests, unobtainable. The Divine Comedy is among the very highest of literary achievements. “The majority of poems one outgrows and outlives, as one outgrows and outlives the majority of human passions: Dante’s is one of those which one can only just hope to grow up to at the end of life.” Thus Dante is both easy and extraordinarily difficult. These are two criteria of poetic greatness. Eliot begins the essay Tradition and the Individual Talent with another paradox. The truly original poet, he suggests, must have what he calls the historical sense. “This historical sense,” Eliot writes, “which is a sense of the timeless as well as of the temporal and of the timeless and of the temporal together, is what makes a writer traditional. And it is at the same time what makes a writer most acutely conscious of his place in time, of his own contemporaneity.” Eliot goes on to say that the great art of the past exists in a kind of order, of which any new, important work must become a part. “Whoever has approved this idea of order, of the form of European, of English literature,” he explains, “will not find it preposterous that the past should be altered by the present as much as the present is directed by the past.” This startling idea follows from Eliot’s conception of order. He does not mean, of course, that the writing of a new work will change any of the lines of Shakespeare. But if the new work is worthy to be placed in the tradition of European poetry, its existence will subtly change our view, our understanding, of Shakespeare. In this sense, Eliot is certainly correct in suggesting that “the poet who is aware of this will be aware of great difficulties and responsibilities.” Having made this point, Eliot turns to a still more important one. “Poetry,” he says, “is not a turning loose of emotion, but an escape from emotion; it is not the expression of personality, but an escape from personality.” The best poetry, he says, “is an expression of significant emotion, emotion which has its life in the poem and not in the history of the poet.” Mere individuality is of no interest or importance. Novelty is preferable to repetition, but both are secondary compared to the truest art, which is impersonal.