Author: Anton Chekhov Like Synge, Chekhov wrote plays more of mood than of action. Like Ibsen, he used symbols to convey psychological states. But where Synge was thoroughly Irish and Ibsen typically Norwegian, Chekhov was a spokesman for the Russia of his time. Through his greatest plays runs one recurring theme. That theme is change, and the tragedy of people who cannot adapt to it. Chekhov’s Russia was in a state of social flux. The old aristocracy was doomed, and the traditional class distinctions were soon to be broken down. These alterations in the social structure were inevitable, the dramatist saw, and his tragedies are those of people caught in the tide and unable to ride with it. There is poignancy in Chekhov’s tragic characters. They do not passively accept being submerged. They reach out toward their dreams; they hope for something better. Chekhov’s dramatic moods alternate between hope and despair. The cherry orchard in Chekhov’s play is a symbol of an old, outdated way of life. Once productive and world-famous, the grandest possession of a proud family, the orchard has become a useless luxury which must be sold to pay heavy debts. Madame Ranevskaya brought about the family calamity by her generous, foolish, spendthrift behavior. Yet she cannot face the need to turn the cherry orchard into a summer resort, which would be profitable. Her adopted daughter Varya tries to run the household economically, but her small efforts are useless. Madame Ranevskaya, accustomed to a life of extravagant ease, cannot change; and the estate is auctioned off. It is bought by a former serf who begins immediately to have the cherry trees cut down. The family leaves, cheerfully dreaming of an untroubled life ahead, just as they had formerly dreamed that they could return to the happy past. Despite their optimism, however, one has the sense that they are really trapped, as much by their own shortcomings as by their social situation. The servants, too, are unable to adapt to the new order. Old Firs cannot accept freedom after his long years of service; at the play’s end, when he is forgotten and left behind, he lies down almost certainly to die. The Cherry Orchard ends with the sound of a snapping violin string which signals the end of a lovely but outmoded way of life. Russian though it is in atmosphere, nineteenth-century though it is in setting, Chekhov’s masterpiece is timeless. Today’s world, too, is changing, and thinking people are forced to re-evaluate their ideas and attitudes. Chekhov saw the great danger in grasping thoughtlessly at panaceas. He longed to better the conditions in Russia under the czars, but he distrusted generalized solutions. He saw no practical answer to Russia’s problems in Tolstoy’s dreams of mankind’s perfectibility, nor in Dostoevsky’s Christianity, nor in communism. Chekhov wrote: “God preserve us from generalizations. There are a great many opinions in this world, and a good half of them are professed by people who have never been in trouble.” Chekhov makes no generalizations and no judgments. He gives no hint, in The Cherry Orchard, that he believes the new way of life will necessarily be better; nor does he condemn the old way as altogether bad. Like the characters in Synge’s play, Chekhov’s people are caught in a tragic dilemma. Like Synge, Chekhov has us believe that they will endure because of their humanity. The strength of Chekhov’s people is their unquenchable hope. They cannot change the world to suit their weaknesses. When they cannot alter themselves to fit the world, they must simply endure. Their hope, their perseverance are remarkable. We cannot pity them. We admire them. This was Chekhov’s message, as pertinent today as ever, and seldom so powerfully stated.