Author: Thomas Mann Thomas Mann was born in Lübeck, Germany, on June 6, 1875. His father was a grain merchant and senator of the city, his mother descended from Portuguese-Creole Brazilian ancestors. Young Mann, who detested school, was a writer almost from the first. After his father’s death, he worked as an insurance clerk and attended the university in Munich. With his brother Heinrich, also a writer, he spent a year in Rome. A first book of stories, Little Herr Friede mann, was published in 1898. In Palestrina, near Rome, he began his first novel, Buddenbrooks, and finished it later while he was working as an editor on the satirical journal Simplicissimus in Munich. Slow to take hold, in a year Buddenbrooks made its author the most famous young writer in Germany. Tristan, which included Tonio Kröger and other tales, came out in 1903, and the play Fiorenza in 1906. That same year he married the daughter of the mathematician Alfred Pringsheim. They had six children. Mann’s second novel, Royal Highness, appeared in 1909, and was followed by one of his best-known works, Death in Venice. During World War I he published a book of stories and Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man. At the same time he was working on The Magic Mountain. Brought out in 1924, this great novel established its author as a world figure. In 1929 he was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature. Mann left Germany in 1933, the year Hitler came to power. That same year he published the first volume of his massive biblical tetralogy, Joseph and His Brothers. It was finished ten years later. He lived for a while in Switzerland, then moved to Princeton, New Jersey, and in 1941 to Pacific Palisades, California. In 1944 he became an American citizen. During this period he wrote The Be loved Returns, Doctor Faustus, and The Holy Sinner. In essays, speeches, and radio addresses, he spoke out strongly for human liberty. In the early 1950’s he settled near Zurich, Switzerland, where he wrote the book-length Confessions of Felix Krull, Confi dence Man. He was one of the great composers of Form in literature, dedicated, as he said, to the task of “marrying the daemonic with the formal, the private and Bohemian with the official and representative….” He died on August 12, 1955. In A Sketch of My Life, Mann tells how he wrote Mario and the Magician. During the summer of 1929 he took his wife and younger children to Rauschen, a Baltic seaside resort. He had, as he says, “no talent for unoccupied recreation”; and the manuscript of Joseph was too bulky to carry with him. So he decided to work on something that could be written without notes, “an incident of a previous holiday in Forte dei Marmi, near Viareggio,” Italy. He tried to work in his room. But “the feeling that the sea was waiting” forced him outside. In a wicker chair at the water’s edge, with a pad on his knee, tranquil amidst the animation of the bathing hour, he found that “the fable, all unexpectedly, grew out of the anecdote, the intellectualized literary form out of mere ‘story-telling’; the personal turned into the symbolic and ethical.” How well he understood what he was doing—and how well he has done it! In the opening sentence—“The atmosphere of Torre di Venere remains unpleasant in the memory”—the tone is set. First we are given a broad view of the resort. Then two or three “unpleasantnesses.” Oh, nothing much—a shade of discrimination at the Grand Hotel, the highhandedness of the Principessa. These are relieved at once by the good nature of Signora Angiolieri, one-time companion of the actress Eleonora Duse. But almost at once the irritations, offset here and there by a touch of humor, begin again. The children are puzzled by phrases “about the greatness and dignity of Italy.” A spoiled boy gets hysterical about a crab. A gentleman in a bowler hat is outraged when the little girl is allowed to take off her bathing suit. He summons the authorities, Gradually, out of such trivia, the temper of a whole society is built up. The sun burns down “in all its arrogant power.” But all this is a mere prelude to that last evening under the domination of a “traveling virtuoso” who calls himself Cavaliere Cipolla. Cipolla bills himself as “forzatore, illusionista, prestidigitatore”—that is, compeller or dominator, illusionist, juggler. He is a masterful creation and a great symbol. Note that when Mann brought him to life, he had only the lesser model of Mussolini. Hitler was still a politician gathering a following. Using only the quietest and most judicious means, in the voice of a narrator who is himself part of the uneasy audience, Mann creates the malevolent Cipolla with such naked force that we ourselves feel a hostile anger rise in us at the whistle of his whip. Cipolla is a charlatan. Like Stevenson’s Mr. Hyde, he is deformed, and his deformity is a sign. He is a figure of the corrupt artist who debases his audience. He is a man literally insane with the will to power. His power is the power of Circe. He is an animal trainer who turns men into beasts. He is the kind of tyrant who demands not mere service but eager co-operation; a tyrant who violates not merely the bodies but the hearts and minds of his victims; a tyrant who destroys the personality of his subjects and demands to be loved for it. He believes in his own terrible will and in nothing else. We do not need to be told that Mann, like Lawrence, detested this imposing of the will, by fear or fraud or violence or mere superior power, on other human beings. We may coin a term for it—Cipolla’s Evil. In everyday living or public life, it is all too often still powerful in our world.