Author: Ivan Turgenev Ivan Turgenev was born at Orel, Russia, October 28, 1818 (Old Style). He grew up under a tyrannical mother on the family estate at Spasskoye. He was graduated from the University of St. Petersburg, where he studied under Gogol. In 1843 he took a job in the Ministry of the Interior. That same year he published Parasha, a story in verse, and met the Spanish gypsy opera singer Pauline Garcia, wife of Louis Viardot, her manager, and sister of the equally famous Malibran. Turgenev began a lifelong attachment to her. During the late 1840’s, he spent his summers at the Viardots’ estate at Courtavenel and wintered in Paris. He wrote A Month in the Country and other plays. After his mother’s death in 1850 he inherited the Spasskoye estate but bad management largely diminished his income. In 1852 his obituary tribute to Gogol got him imprisoned for a month (visiting friends made it a triumph) and he was later confined to his estate. That same year A Sports man’s Sketches was published. All his life he maintained hot-and-cold friendships with Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. Turgenev’s Rudin and A Nest of Gentlefolk appeared in the late 1850’s, followed by On the Eve in 1860 and Fathers and Sons in 1862. Two years later he was called before a Russian Senatorial committee to answer the charge that he had conspired with Herzen’s revolutionary group in London. He was exonerated. About this time he became a member of the Paris coterie composed of Flaubert, Edmond de Goncourt, Zola, and Daudet. He befriended young Henry James. In 1872 A Month in the Country was staged for the first time, in Moscow, and Turgenev published Spring Freshets. He and the Viardots built a joint villa at Bougival, near Paris. Virgin Soil appeared in 1877. By 1882 he was gravely ill, but continued work on Clara Milich and Poems in Prose. He is regarded as the most Western of the great Russian writers, the most poetic of realists and one of the fathers of the modern objective novel. He died at Bougival on September 3, 1883. Like Dostoevsky’s White Nights and Galsworthy’s The Apple- Tree, First Love is a commemoration of that early “happiness verging on imbecility.” It was published in March, 1860. In his biography of the author, Avrahm Yarmolinsky mentions that Turgenev said he “drew upon his reminiscences of the family life of his parents. The self-contained, elegantly groomed gentleman of the tale, with his spasmodically affectionate manner toward his family, his excellent horsemanship, and his epicurean tastes, was modeled upon the author’s father….” But such reminiscences have been freely transformed into a work of art. The mother of the story, for example, shows little likeness to the author’s mother. Even in his old age, Turgenev recalled that when he was young she saw to it that he was “flogged nearly every day.” He spoke of First Love as one of his “fairy tales.” Why? Partly, perhaps, because the incidents of the story might have happened in any time or place; but partly because it had little to do with the social struggle that nearly all nineteenth-century Russian writers felt themselves obliged to treat. But it is much more than a “fairy tale.” It is, quite clearly, a little masterpiece. It is put together with such extraordinary grace that we are hardly conscious of reading a story at all. We simply live it. We take part in young Vladimir’s feelings and act them out with him, because they are also ours. They are the feelings of every man who was ever in love in his first youth. And by that sign, in the perfect candor of art, they remind us how much we have forgotten, or sentimentalized, or left out; how much we felt and did not know we felt; how ignorant and violent we were, how callous and how touching. Even in a writer famous for his portraits of young girls, the Princess Zinaida is a superlative creation. This “tall, slender girl in a striped pink dress”—mischievous, quick-witted, beautiful, tendercruel, a demanding ringmaster to her little circus of admirers—delights us at first with the freedom of her charm and then touches us with the despairing pathos of the trap in which she feels herself caught. Nor are we likely to forget the peasant grossness of old Princess Zasyekin or the draggletail poverty of her house. It becomes, nevertheless, a magic place for young Vladimir. We see finally that First Love is an astonishing example of Turgenev’s psychological perception. This basic drama, father and son in love with the same young woman—does it not reproduce and repeat Freud’s Oedipus situation in infancy, in which father and son compete for the mother’s love? Moreover, the incidents that convey Vladimir’s step-by-step understanding of the love between Zinaida and his father exactly parallel the small boy’s gradual discovery of the relation between his parents. And does not Zinaida treat Vladimir “like a child”—that is, as if she were his mother? But we observe one striking difference. Vladimir is at an age to identify himself with his father. So, in their love, it is as if he had both won and lost.