Author: Voltaire Voltaire (pen name of François Marie Arouet), the son of a notary, was born in Paris on November 21, 1694. He was educated at the Jesuit Collège Louis-le-Grand. He read law and visited The Hague in the Marquis de Châteauneuf’s s suite. In Paris he belonged to the “Court of Sceaux,” the circle of the beautiful Duchesse du Maine. In 1716, apparently for writing lampoons, he was exiled for the first time. When he came back, he was sent to the Bastille. There he rewrote his play Oedipus and changed his name to Voltaire. He was released the following year. Oedipus opened in 1718 and had a prosperous run. With the royalties Voltaire made the first of a thousand profitable speculations. But trouble was his native weather. He found it prudent to exile himself again. When he returned to Paris in 1720, his play Artémire was put on and failed. His father left him a considerable fortune. The Regent granted him a pension. In 1722 he went to Belgium and Holland on a secret diplomatic mission. After an unfortunate opening, his tragedy Mariamne was rewritten and did very well. In the early 1720’s he worked at being a courtier under the wing of the Duc de Richelieu. He was insulted by the Chevalier de Rohan and replied in kind. Rohan had him beaten. He challenged the Chevalier to a duel but on the appointed morning he was thrown into the Bastille again. Voltaire spent three years in England, where he met the Walpoles, Congreve, and Pope. Back in Paris in 1729, he was busy with such projects as the Henriade and a series of new plays—Brutus, Eriphile, and Zaïre. Two notable satires, Philosophic Letters on the English and The Temple of Fashion, got him into trouble again. He retired to Lorraine, where he and the Marquise du Châtelet fitted out an old château at Cirey. He wrote prodigiously. Mérope is probably his most respected work of this period, but it did not appear on the stage until 1743. During the 1740’s he was again at court. In 1745 he was made historiographer-royal and the next year elected to the French Academy. By this time he was the great star of the Enlightenment and the most famous writer in Europe. He accepted Frederick of Prussia’s invitations to the Prussian court in 1751, but quarrels and difficulties caused him to leave Potsdam. He was arrested in Frankfurt and refused permission to enter France. He went to Switzerland and there set up his famous residence at Ferney, near Geneva. In 1759 he wrote Candide. He was visited by the great of Europe. He never refused a fight for political liberty. In 1778 he made a last triumphal entry into Paris, where his new play, Irène, was produced. He died there on May 30 of the same year. We read Micromégas (the name means “Little-Big”) with one eye on Voltaire’s time and one eye on our own. He is writing about astronauts—and he was not the first—who preceded by many years Yuri Gagarin and John Glenn. To him the movement between worlds was outright fantasy—and what an easy time his astronauts had of it, with their hitching a ride on a comet and their transit by sunbeam from globe to globe “as a bird flutters from branch to branch.” We smile a little. For us travel in space is already possible. We have done it. Other worlds are clearly in reach. We notice at once that, as the title suggests, the satire of Micro mégas revolves almost completely on the idea of relative quantity. It is a statistician’s fantasy, in which the mathematician (junior grade), the surveyor, the controller of weights and measures, the demographer, the astronomer, and the physicist may all find themselves amusingly at home. May we infer, from the height of Mr. Micromégas the Sirian, the circumference of his waist and even the scale of his planet? If he is grown up at the age of four hundred and fifty, at what age is he likely to die? The Saturnian secretary is a mere 6,000 feet tall. How will he manage to talk to Micromégas? Fortunately, apart from size, the inhabitants of all the worlds speak the same language. The Sirian and the Saturnian, though one has a thousand senses and the other only seventy-two, get along very well with each other. Each bewails the shortness of life, though one lives seven hundred times longer than the other. Amiably, but in the face of some protest from the Saturnian’s friend, “a pretty little dark girl who stood only six hundred and sixty fathoms,” they set out on a tour of the universe. On the planet Earth they find the most amazing creatures of all—maggots who are both wise and wicked, whose philosophers make a point of disagreeing with each other, and who are “possessed of an arrogance almost infinitely great.” “I see more than ever,” says Micromégas, “that nothing must be judged by its apparent size.”