Author: F. Scott Fitzgerald Francis Scott Key Fitzgerald was born in St. Paul, Minnesota, on September 24, 1896. He attended the Newman School and entered Princeton University in the class of 1917. In 1917–19 he served as a lieutenant in the army but did not get to France. He wrote advertising copy in New York and went back to St. Paul to rewrite his first novel, This Side of Paradise, published in 1920. At one stroke it made him the prophet and golden boy of the beginning Jazz Age. In April of the same year he married Zelda Sayre of Montgomery, Alabama. They lived in New York City and Westport, Connecticut, made a first foray to Europe, and returned to St. Paul. There Fitzgerald finished a second novel, The Beautiful and the Damned. This appeared in 1922, between two collections of stories: Flappers and Philosophers and Tales of the Jazz Age. During this period he was also working on a satiric play, The Vegetable. It was tried out on the road but never reached Broadway. In 1922 he rented a house at Great Neck, Long Island. It became a weekend resort for New York party goers. Between November and April, Fitzgerald wrote himself out of debt with eleven short stories. In Great Neck and in St. Raphaël, France, he took up the short novel he had begun a year or two before. This was The Great Gatsby, finished in late 1924 and published in April of the next year. A third book of stories, All the Sad Young Men, came out in 1926. While the 1920’s moved to their disastrous close, Fitzgerald traveled back and forth between Paris, Hollywood, Wilmington, and Cap d’Antibes, France. In 1934, after several false starts, he produced his second important novel, Tender Is the Night. The stories in Taps at Reveille appeared the following year. He suffered from a drinking habit traceable, in part at least, to a condition diagnosed as hyperinsulinism. He died in Hollywood on December 21, 1940. After Fitzgerald’s death, his friend Edmund Wilson edited two supplements to his work: The Last Tycoon, an unfinished novel, and a miscellany called The Crack-Up. The Diamond as Big as the Ritz belongs to Fitzgerald’s first period. The setting appears to derive from a 1915 vacation visit to the opulent ranch of his friend Charles W. (“Sap”) Donahoe at White Sulphur Springs, Montana. But the story of a secret and impossibly rich never-never land in the mountains is an old western American legend; and the detail of diamonds picked up from the ground recalls the Great Diamond Hoax that amused San Francisco in the late nineteenth century. Fitzgerald wrote the story in a downtown office in St. Paul. It came out in Smart Set magazine for June, 1922, and was reprinted that same year in Tales of the Jazz Age. It is, first of all, a good story, told with verve and a kind of gleeful ingenuity. Beyond that, it suggests many things, and one thing in particular. What do we notice first? We say to ourselves that this is the burlesque satire of the 1920’s, a satire based on wild exaggeration of the typical and familiar. H.L.Mencken set the tone in his magazines. We catch it in Elmer Gantry, and even in some of the dialogues in Hemingway’s The Sun Also Rises. What does Fitzgerald do with it? We observe that the name of John T.Unger’s home town is Hades. (Every American small town was by definition “Hades” in the 1920’s.) There are vaudeville jokes about it. A “Rolls-Pierce” automobile is mentioned (Rolls-Royce and the now extinct Pierce-Arrow). The word “Ritz” occurs in the title. (The Ritz-Carlton Hotel in New York, classic symbol of luxury in the 1920’s, has long since fallen under the wrecker’s ball.) But it does not escape us that “St. Midas’ School” or its equivalent still exists, and that middle western boys are still sent to it; that the Ritz has been replaced by vaster and chillier luxury hotels, whose good taste is far more in doubt; or that the suburban Hades has inherited most of the faults and few of the virtues of the small-town one. So we move in toward the center of Fitzgerald’s story. What does he mean by that symbol of his, that tyrannical utopia lost in the American mountains? What are we to make of this Arabian Nights domain where every luxury is blown up into something monstrously absurd, where the slaves have never been freed, where a young girl collects rhinestones because diamonds bore her? And who is Braddock Washington? Is he only the last of the nineteenth-century robber barons, living beyond his time? Or is he a kind of Hitler before his time, preparing his own Götterdämmerung? For Fitzgerald, we may suspect, he was neither. Washington is the barbarous extreme of a figure that he would come back to time after time, in the Tom Buchanan of The Great Gatsby, in the Warren family of Tender Is the Night, and in a dozen other stories. He is the man of great wealth whose wealth may be turned into a kind of social privilege that makes possible the fullest kind of good life or the most arrogantly inhuman evil. In Washington it creates a monster who claims the right to murder his guests and bribe God.