Author: Matthew Arnold Matthew Arnold was born in Middlesex, England, December 24, 1822. His father was the noted Dr. Thomas Arnold, headmaster of Rugby. Young Arnold went to Rugby and Balliol College, Oxford, where he took the Newdigate Prize for poetry. In the Lake District he walked, skated, and sailed a boat. He had “Olympian manners.” When he visited the novelist George Sand in France, she said that he gave “the effect of a young Milton on his travels.” In 1847 he became private secretary to Lord Lansdowne. His first collection of verse, The Strayed Reveller and Other Poems, in 1849, and a second three years later, were published under the initial “A.” He married Frances Lucy Wightman in 1851. Lansdowne had arranged an appointment for Arnold as an Inspector of Schools. He served in that department for thirty-five years. His work required almost continual travel in England, plus frequent inspection tours in Holland, Germany, Austria, Italy, and France. Under his own name he published Poems in 1853 and Poems: Second Series two years later. The tragedy Merope appeared in 1858. Except for New Poems in 1867, most of his later work was devoted to the literature of ideas, criticism in particular. Much of this came out of his election in 1857 as professor of poetry at Oxford, a post he held for ten years. His inaugural address, On the Modern Element in Literature, and such lectures as The Study of Poetry (see below) and On Translating Homer belong among his most famous essays. In 1868 the Arnold family moved to Harrow and in 1873 to Cobham, Surrey, Arnold’s home for the rest of his life. Culture and Anarchy was much talked about, but Literature and Dogma, published in 1873, became his first best seller of sorts. His 1883–84 lecture tour in the United States was mildly successful. He made another visit two years later. As early as 1885 he had been troubled with angina pectoris. He continued to walk and skate a little. In the spring of 1888, he traveled to Liverpool to meet his daughter Lucy and his grandchild, inbound from America. Joyful at the reunion to come, he ran for a tram, leaped over a low fence, and fell dead. The date was April 15, 1888. The Study of Poetry was first published in 1880 as an introduction to T.H.Ward’s anthology, The English Poets. Like Sweetness and Light, its companion piece here, it shows us what a broad focus Arnold opened out on his time. At bottom, he was a poet-critic. Deliberately, he enlarged his viewpoint to take in the whole of society. He meant to deal with it in terms of those ideas—science, government, culture, history—by which, he felt, society was ordered; and this in turn required an expanded view of literature and of culture in general. But he did not stop there. He was a reformer, at the topmost level. We recall his division of Englishmen into Barbarians (the upper class), Philistines (the middle class), and Populace (the working class). His mission, he felt, was to convert the heathen of the new middle class, swollen with industrial and financial power, and all but indifferent to any cultural demand that did not serve such power. Thus he became a missionary politician of ideas, and most of his essays need to be understood first of all in that light. They are Epistles to the Philistines. He believed, as Lewis Mumford wrote nearly a hundred years later, that “an economy of abundance brings with it, not the duty to consume, but the readiness to create.” And what was to be created was nothing less than the well-rounded and harmonious personality of man. Have we reached that goal yet? Insofar as we have not, and in the ways that we have not, Arnold still speaks to us as directly as he spoke to his contemporaries. Almost a century later, the first pages of The Study of Poetry can still shock us a little. “Without poetry,” Arnold writes, “our science will appear incomplete; and most of what now passes with us for religion and philosophy will be replaced by poetry.” But only “the best poetry” will do. And how shall we recognize and define “the best poetry”? This last question alone has occupied many minds for a score of centuries. Arnold makes it his principal subject. Except as data, science leaves out the life of feeling that gives tone to everything we do. But feeling is the medium and combining agent in poetry. Thus the idea that science will “appear incomplete” without poetry and the other arts becomes an ordinary fact. But what are we to make of the prediction that much of Victorian religion and philosophy would be “replaced by poetry”? We know, at least, that it has not happened. Poetry can hardly be said to have taken the place of religion and philosophy in any significant way. And we gather from Arnold’s other essays that he was a religious reformer rather than an agnostic. But he makes an excellent case for the possible uses of poetry as a cultural agent. He begins by trying to tell us how to read poetry, and how to tell the good from the bad. This involves a revaluation of English poets from the beginning—rather too much for one essay. He quotes examples, to show us, rather than attempt to explain what good poetry is. (This approach, expanded to take in the whole poem as text, became the principal method of the American New Critics in the mid-twentieth century.) He takes his examples, not from English poetry alone, but from what he knows of European poetry in general. Our second essay, Sweetness and Light, shows us Arnold as the missionary of culture marching boldly into the enemy camp. Armed with such slogans as “To make reason and the will of God prevail!” and “Perfection…consists in becoming something rather than in having something,” he sets up his ideal of the harmonious man. Then, one by one, he attacks the enemy idols: wealth, the cult of bodily vigor and large families, Puritan religion, machinery, Bentham’s utilitarianism and the rest. Culture, he asserts, is a democratic idea. It must be diffused “from one end of society to the other.”