Author: Eugene O'Neill Eugene Gladstone O’Neill was born on October 16, 1888, in a Broadway hotel in New York City. His father, James O’Neill, was a popular melodramatic actor who made a fortune by playing for almost twenty years in The Count of Monte Cristo. His mother, Ella Quinlan O’Neill, was addicted to drugs. His older brother was an alcoholic failure. The O’Neills, like characters in Eugene’s plays, were sensitive people in torment. As a boy, Eugene O’Neill was sometimes taken on road tours with his parents, sometimes put in Roman Catholic boarding schools. He enrolled in Princeton in 1906, but was expelled after one year and spent the next few years drifting from one job and one country to another. He shipped as a sailor to South America and Europe. In 1912 came the turning point of his life. O’Neill entered a Connecticut sanatorium as a tuberculosis patient. There he had time both to consider his life and to read many books. From Strindberg he learned to appreciate dramatic realism. From Marx he gained a political philosophy. From Freud he learned of the dramas played out in the depths of each man’s unconscious. O’Neill determined to become a playwright. After he left the sanatorium he spent some months at Harvard as a student in Professor George Pierce Baker’s famous 47 Workshop. In 1916 the newly organized Provincetown Players gave the first public performance of an O’Neill play, Bound East for Cardiff. The Players moved to a New York theater where they presented more of O’Neill’s dramas. Then, in 1920, his success was secured when his first full-length play, Beyond the Horizon, won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama. Two other plays were later awarded Pulitzer Prizes—Anna Christie (1922) and Strange Interlude (1928). In 1936 O’Neill became the first American playwright to receive the Nobel Prize. About 1947 O’Neill was stricken with Parkinson’s disease, a palsy which made it impossible for him to write. He died on November 27, 1953, in Boston of pneumonia. He had been married three times and had three children. A prolific writer, O’Neill turned out many plays, apparently on a great variety of subjects. With the exception of his one comedy, Ah, Wilderness!, however, his dramas all deal with the same general problem—the terrible predicament of man struggling against unseen forces for his place in a universe that is essentially alien to him. Although O’Neill was a talented innovator, bringing many new methods and effects to the stage, his importance as a dramatist rests mainly on the power with which he played variations on his huge theme. Like the ancient writers of Greek tragedy, O’Neill saw man as the victim and plaything of forces which he could neither understand nor control. For the Greeks these influences were the gods. But for O’Neill they were the powerful forces of the unconscious. They were within man himself. The Emperor Jones was produced in 1920. Its hero, Brutus Jones, an ex-Pullman porter, has fled to the West Indies to escape punishment for murder. At first he is very successful in the new life he makes for himself. In a mere two years he manages to have himself made Emperor. He rules his subjects with a ruthless and iron hand. As the play begins, his reign is coming to an end. Jones tries to escape, but he finds himself trapped between civilization and the jungle—between his deepest desires and the guilt he feels. He is unable to throw off his superstition and primitive fear, yet he is equally unable to make a place for himself in modern society. Tom-toms pound offstage throughout the last two-thirds of the play. This device, an example of O’Neill’s theatrical imagination, is extremely powerful. The beat grows louder and faster as Jones races helplessly toward his doom. We have the impression that it is thedrum that “cotches” Jones, not his rebellious subjects. The tom-toms symbolize his guilt and fear. In his nightmare dash through the jungle, Jones fires his precious gunshots, one by one, at ghosts, wasting his strength in combating illusions. But the ghosts are in his own mind; he cannot escape them. As he stumbles through the wilderness he discards, piece by piece, the trappings of emperor, of civilization, that he had so proudly collected. He is left naked and alone with himself. The Emperor Jones was the first modern drama to feature a Negro as a tragic hero. But the basic human situation that the play is about does not depend on its hero being a Negro. All men, O’Neill seems to be saying, are both emperors and fugitives. All men are trapped between civilization and the jungle. All men have guilts and fears, and cannot bear to be alone with their own “ghosts.” When Jones is finally brought down by the enemy it is with a silver bullet—in the “‘eighth o’ style,” as Smithers, the cockney trader, says. The Emperor Jones has been defeated by forces stronger than he, but there is great dignity in the defeat.