Author: Alexander Pushkin Alexander Pushkin was born in Moscow, on June 6, 1799. His father belonged to the nobility; his mother was descended from an Abyssinian who served Peter the Great. Young Pushkin went to school at Tsarskoe Selo. By 1817 he was attached to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and writing Ruslan and Ly’udmila, a romantic epic. He became a man about town. Before he was twenty-one his outspoken Ode to Liberty, handed round in manuscript, got him banished to the south of Russia. From that day on he was never free of censors and police spies. A series of Byronic poems came out of his six years in the Caucasus. His tragedy Boris Godunov later became the rootstock for Mussorgsky’s opera. Czar Nicholas I, in the midst of his coronation, ordered the exiled poet brought to Moscow.“…it is I who shall be your censor,” said the Czar. In the Dekabrist Rebellion of 1825, Pushkin, who had been mixed up with the conspirators, managed to burn his incriminating papers. During the 1820’s and 30’s he wrote such narrative poems as Poltava and A Voyage to Arzrum. By the early 1830’s he had finished Eugen Onegin, on which the Tschaikovsky opera is based. Pushkin began his first, unfinished prose works, The Negro of Peter the Great, in 1827. Out of the factual History of the Revolt of Pugachev of 1773 came his only completed novel, The Captains Daughter. In 1831 he married Natalia Goncharov, a Moscow beauty and favorite of the Czar. Pushkin was restored to a job in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, at 5,000 rubles a year. The husband of his wife’s sister, Baron George Heckeren d’Anthès, adopted son of the Dutch minister, began to pay open court to Natalia. Anonymous letters reached Pushkin. In the duel that followed, Pushkin was wounded. He died two days later, on February 10, 1837. The Queen of Spades was published in 1834. Dostoevsky said that it had created a Russian literary language. Tschaikovsky turned it into the opera Pique Dame. Later it became a distinguished motion picture. It was certainly the most popular of Pushkin’s stories and took its place among the half-dozen most popular in the whole Romantic movement. Through all these changes it has kept its air of teasing mystery. It is a piece of electric storytelling. Who is Hermann, the hero or anti-hero? He is a cousin of Stendhal’s Julien Sorel, who had appeared earlier in The Red and the Black. He is the young man on the make in the hurly-burly of post-Napoleonic Europe. He lives by the will. “A man without morals or religion!” as Pushkin’s legend tells us. Petty heir to Napoleon, Hermann is master of a cool self-possession in every action. And this is his mark: he acts. He wants power. Money is the most available kind of power. Moved by a casual story, he resolves to make money gambling. But honest gambling is by definition chance. Hermann is not interested in chance. He wants a sure thing. To believe in a sure thing, we must believe (a) that the cards fall in a certain rigidly predictable order, and (b) that this order can be known and acted on. Hermann does believe this, and for the term of the story Pushkin asks us to believe it too. The young officer of engineers is convinced that the aged Countess Anna Fedotovna knows this secret. We are told that it has already worked twice: once when it enabled Anna Fedotovna to pay off her gambling debts, and once when she gave it to young Chaplitzky. And where did she get it? It was given to her by the Count St.-Germain (a real personage, who served Louis XV as an envoy, claimed to have found the elixir of life, and was one of the most famous occultists of his time). So, almost from the first, we are edged over into that shadowy region where what is believable merges with what we wish to believe. Rosemary Edmonds, one of Pushkin’s translators, has remarked that this is “a psychological tale without psychology.” That is, we are not told what the character is thinking; we are allowed to deduce it from his acts. But we are left with a residue of mystery, placed there, for our entertainment, by the author himself. If Hermann had not played the wrong card, would he have won again? And why did he play the wrong card? Was it because he was tricked into punishing himself for the guilt he felt at the old woman’s death? Or was he, in fact, perhaps a little deranged? Was it all delusion—Anna Fedotovna’s phantom, the three cards, her distorted face in the queen of spades? Or should we believe—in terms of the story, at least—that the old woman had got her revenge for the indignity of her death? In that case, why had she given him the names of all three winning cards?