Author: Daniel Defoe Daniel Defoe (the name had many forms) was born in London, probably in the late summer of 1660. He was schooled for the Presbyterian ministry at Morton’s academy but did not take orders. By 1683 he was established as a London merchant in hosiery, wines, and tobacco. He married Mary Tuffley in 1684 and the next year rode as a trouper in Monmouth’s Rebellion. During the 1680’s, business travels took him all over Great Britain and the Continent. In 1692 he went bankrupt with debts amounting to £17,000. His creditors were repaid almost to the last penny. He became King William III’s agent and confidential adviser. His verse satire in defense of William, The True-Born Englishman, had a large sale. Defoe established a prosperous brickworks. In 1702, under Queen Anne, he published a satire against High Church domination, The Shortest Way with the Dissenters. In the furor growing out of this he was exposed in the pillory and imprisoned. His business failed. He was released late in 1703, evidently with the understanding that he would act as confidential agent, reporter, and pamphleteer for the government. He continued to do this work under various ministries. From 1704 to 1713, he published and wrote much of the Review, the most famous of twenty-six journals he had a hand in. In all, Defoe was arrested six or seven times, apparently for the most part on charges sponsored by his political enemies. His career as a novelist began at fifty-nine with the first volume of Robinson Crusoe (see below). The second volume and a sequel appeared within a twelvemonth. In 1720 he published The Life and Adventures of Mr. Duncan Campbell, Memoirs of a Cavalier, and The Life of Captain Singleton. In 1722 came Moll Flanders, A Journal of the Plague Year, and The History of Colonel Jacque. These were followed by Roxana, Jonathan Wild and other stories of criminals, and a three-volume guide to Great Britain. Defoe has been credited with more than 500 titles. He was the first major novelist in English and he may be said to have established the main tradition in British journalism. He died in Ropemaker’s Alley, London, on April 24, 1731. Robinson Crusoe was first published on April 25, 1719. It delighted everybody—other writers, from Rousseau to Swift, and people who seldom read a book. It has never stopped selling. When the twentieth century began, more than 700 editions, translations, and imitations had been printed. Scores of others have been added since. Richard Brinsley Sheridan made a pantomime out of the story and David Garrick played in it. Jacques Offenbach put the Great Castaway into an opera. His adventures were turned into a motion picture by the distinguished Spanish director, Luis Bunuel. In “Images for Crusoe,” the French poet St.-John Perse gave us a new vision of the hero’s return. It is a great story, loved in every nation. Even the Eskimos have a translation of it. It derives in part—but only in small part—from the true history of Alexander Selkirk, who seems to have been a self-made exile on one of the Juan Fernández Islands off the coast of Chile in the early 1700’s. But how can we account for the great sweep of Robinson Crusoe’s popularity? For one thing, a career of hard and rapid writing had taught Defoe to use words with the practical exactness of a shipmaster filling in his log, but with a flexibility and ease few shipmasters could equal. Everyone can understand Crusoe. And who has not asked himself what he would do if he were in Crusoe’s place, and then, by the magic of Defoe’s words, put himself there? It is the story of a man alone, but there is no great loneliness in it. After his first panic, Crusoe remembers the cure for loneliness: work, projects, and more work. One of the most famous incidents of the story—the finding of a footprint in the sand—is precisely the point at which the man alone encounters human society again. And how does he react? He is terrified. He assumes, as he has assumed from the first, that any stranger will be hostile. Crusoe is the New Man, the new middle-class man who deals in things. In England, he has been on the rise since the late Middle Ages. Now he stands clear. Two points distinguish him: he is a man of business, and a nonconformist in religion. He has been persecuted. He is distrustful. Defoe puts him where he put Jonathan Wild, Moll Flanders, and a good many of his other heroes and heroines—a little outside society, or against it. Moreover, we see that Crusoe’s physical adventures are matched at nearly every point by religious ones. In general, except for what seems an excessive sense of guilt, we feel that his respect for moral fact is as hard-headed as his knack for the physical. We note that, in contrast to such books as Typee or Green Mansions, there is no Eve in Crusoe’s Eden. Defoe leaves out a large part of the human race: women. His Eden has no future. Robinson Crusoe is not—or is only at first—a story of survival. He is cast away, not on a true desert island, but on one richly hospitable to human living. One by one, he moves through the three stages that may be said to represent man’s earliest development: the gathering of wild foods, farming, and the keeping of herds. Crusoe is building himself a one-man civilization. Humorous or not, he has his castle and his country seat. He is trying to attain something like the standard of living of a comfortable middle-class Englishman. Moreover, he has tools and supplies saved out of the wreck. What happens to Crusoe has happened to many a civilization in human history: a few things salvaged, and a beginning again.