Author: D.H. Lawrence D.H. (David Herbert) Lawrence was born in Nottinghamshire, England, on September 11, 1885. He was the son of a Midlands coal miner. The younger Lawrence taught school, and attended University College in Nottingham. His reputation built up slowly with the publication of The White Peacock in 1911, followed by The Trespasser the next year and Sons and Lovers in 1913. On July 13, 1914, he became the third husband of Frieda von Richthofen, whose brother ranked as the most famous German fighter pilot in World War I. The English edition of Lawrence’s novel The Rainbow was prosecuted for obscenity in 1915. After 1919 he took up the wandering life of the international artist in the 1920’s. “There’s nothing like keeping on the move,” he said in one of his letters. But he wrote wherever he went—the Italian mainland, Capri, Sicily, and Austria up to 1922; Ceylon, Australia, New Mexico, and Mexico in the years 1922–23; England, France, and Germany in the following year; then back to New Mexico and Mexico. He remained in Europe after 1925. In his own decidedly individual way, lie was a complete man of letters who worked in many forms. Much of his poetry, from Amores to the posthumous work, takes high rank. His Studies in Classic American Literature made some important revaluations in that field. In partial dissent from Freud, two of his books examined the role of the unconscious. He wrote The Widowing of Mrs. Holroyd and other plays, and such penetrating travel books as Mornings in Mexico and Sea and Sardinia. He translated the stories of Giovanni Verga. He is best known, however, for his own stories, and for such novels or novelettes as Women in Love, St. Mawr, The Lost Girl, The Plumed Serpent, and The Virgin and the Gypsy. In 1928 the first edition of Lady Chatterley’s Lover was privately printed in Florence. Some thirty years later it was cleared of obscenity charges in British and American courts. As the 1920’s ended, Lawrence’s health gradually declined. He died of bronchial tuberculosis in Vence, France, on March 2, 1930. The Rocking-Horse Winner first appeared in the 1920’s in Lady Cynthia Asquith’s The Ghost Book. In 1949 it was made into an English motion picture written and directed by Anthony Pelissier. It is perhaps Lawrence’s best-known short story, and one of his finest. It has that touch of the dark sorcerer which we have learned to look for in his most impressive work. He did not need to sign it. His mark is on every word. No one else in English literature could have written it. No one else could have given us that unique mingling of qualities—a style so simple, so apparently offhand in its colloquial ease; the uneasy theme that catches us at once; the particular detail about one family that somehow expands into whole classes in many countries; and the tone of fever, of tension, rising to a shrill pitch in the climax. What is The Rocking-Horse Winner about? We may take it first on a perfectly everyday level. It is a story about a family that needs money. “…your father has no luck,” the small boy’s mother tells him. He decides that he has luck. He will get money for her. He will play the races. He does, and wins. That is all. Or is it? How does he win? He is driven by the soundless voices in the house: “There must be more money! There must be more money!” Like a demented child jockey, he rides his rocking horse in a symbolic race. If he can ride hard enough and “get there,” he will “know” which of the real horses is going to win. When he “knows,” his horse always comes in. So we begin to understand that, on the second or social level, this is a story about the epidemic anxiety of the contemporary world: money worry. Here it communicates itself from the unloving mother to her children, so that the whole house is whispering with it. That this is not real need, that it is anxiety rooted in other sources, Lawrence shows us in a single sardonic touch. Through his uncle, the boy arranges to transfer a considerable sum of money to his mother. Does this quiet the voices? No. They scream now “in a sort of ecstasy: ‘There must be more money!’” We know there will be no end to it. We recognize too the theme of luck. The mother has communicated to her son the belief that luck is the key, the one hope of relief. So he does not ride merely to win money. Money is the magic key that will release his mother’s and his own unbearable anxiety. If he can do this, he will win her love. He gets the money for her and he sees that it does not work. There is nothing to do but try again, to ride and ride until he can bring the winning horse in. We are reminded of that other story of money and luck and magic powers, Pushkin’s The Queen of Spades. Lawrence’s handling of his many-sided symbol is nowhere so masterly as in his muted intimations of love and sexual excitement. We are aware of his doctrine that true sexuality is the live core of human feeling. In the small boy’s anxiety we catch the note of childish sexuality described by Freud. We recognize the familiar Freudian triangle: the son challenging the father for the mother’s love. But Lawrence brings them all together—anxiety, money, luck, love, sexuality—in that last blazing instant when the mother turns on the light in her son’s room.