Author: David Hume The Homes or Humes were minor Scottish gentry. David Hume was born in Edinburgh, April 26 (Old Style), 1711. He left Edinburgh University about 1726. Like Congreve, Burke, and others, he tried the law and did not like it. A turn at business helped him to work off a slight nervous disorder. He went to France, where he wrote A Treatise of Human Nature. The three-volume work was published in England in 1739–40. It got little notice. The first two volumes of his Essays Moral and Political were somewhat better received. He took various positions—tutor to a mad marquess, aide-de-camp to General James Sinclair in Vienna and Turin—in order to earn money for writing. More essays, a rewriting of Book I of the Treatise (this later became Enquiry concerning Human Understanding), and An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals were all published in 1751. The next year he became keeper of the Advocates’ Library in Edinburgh. There, by 1762, he had finished the Four Dissertations and his six-volume History of England. He was famous. How great that fame was he did not know until he went to Paris in 1763 as Acting Secretary of the British Embassy under the Earl of Hertford. The King gave him a reception. The great hostesses fought over him. He became a public idol, as Franklin did later. Hume returned to London in 1766. He took Jean Jacques Rousseau along and found him a house in Staffordshire. But the disturbed Rousseau imagined a plot and fled back to France, where he accused Hume of betraying him. Hume served a year as Undersecretary of State. Then he retired to the company of Adam Smith and other friends in Edinburgh. Boswell, who had called him “the greatest writer in Britain,” visited him just before his death. Would Hume admit to a belief in immortality? No, said Hume, and fended him off with his usual clearheaded good nature. He died on August 25, 1776. Some writers give us trouble by using too many difficult words. In Hume’s case we might almost say that the reverse is true. Of the Standard of Taste is a good example. Its very simplicity of statement, on first reading, makes it a little hard to grasp. Hume does not define his terms. What is “taste”? If we are patient, we shall see that the whole essay becomes a definition. And what is a “sentiment”? We go to the dictionary and find a meaning that seems closest to Hume’s sense: “mental attitude, thought or judgment permeated or prompted by feeling.” He begins by attacking head-on the main difficulty in regard to taste: its great variety, and the variety of standards and points of view this implies. Chacun à son goût, says the French proverb, meaning “everyone to his taste.” Is this cynicism, or mere intellectual courtesy, or the final wisdom of the matter? In any case, Hume would not have been content with it. If we understand what he is doing, we shall be well on the way to understanding his argument. He is not defining taste per se, though it comes to that. He is examining the various factors that have a bearing on it in order to set up a standard of taste. He does this by giving us a point-by-point description of the qualities requisite to a man of taste. Often we are principally conscious of the difference between the standards of his time, in which he shared, and ours. For example, “blame” is a term we might apply to a hunting dog that failed to make a good point, not to a work of art or its creator. The distinction goes beyond vocabulary. The men of the eighteenth century spread moral judgment like a blanket over every aspect of human life. In the same way, Hume extends the operation of taste over theology, philosophy, ethics, science, poetry, and the other arts. Sometimes, as in the discussion of the characters in Homer and Fénelon, we find it difficult to guess whether a moral judgment or a judgment of taste is implied. Perhaps Hume is suggesting that they are close to being the same thing. But in his discussion of the qualities that distinguish the man of taste, Hume stands on high and solid ground. We may disagree here and there, as, for example, in regard to his view that the object of poetry is “to please, by means of the passions and the imagination.” Shelley and Whitman, among others, give it a different character. But we can hardly fail to concur with Hume’s requirements for “a true judge in the finer arts.” He tells us that “strong sense, united to delicate sentiment, improved by practice, perfected by comparison, and cleared of all prejudice, can alone entitle critics to this valuable character; and the joint verdict of such, wherever they are to be found, is the true standard of taste and beauty.” In the two centuries or more since Hume wrote, we have hardly bettered that judgment.