Author: Joseph Conrad Joseph Conrad (Józef Teodor Konrad Nalecz Korzeniowski in full) was born into a Polish landed family at Berdichev in the Polish Ukraine, December 3, 1857. For a time his parents were exiled to Siberia. By 1869 both were dead. Young Conrad, cared for by a warm-hearted uncle, was tutored and schooled in Cracow. He resolved to go to sea. In 1874, aged seventeen, he arrived in Marseilles. Cruises with the port pilots and three voyages to the West Indies gave him his introduction to salt water. He seems to have had a love affair with the mysterious “Doña Rita,” supporter of the Carlist rebellion in Spain and the model for his heroine in The Arrow of Gold. In 1877–78 he was involved in smuggling adventures that ended in the loss of vessel and funds. He borrowed money, lost that too at Monte Carlo, and evidently tried to kill himself. He recovered and shipped out in the steamer Mavis for Constantinople. He had decided to make a career in the British merchant service. In 1881 he signed on as second mate in the bark Palestine, bound for Bangkok. This voyage gave him the source for Youth (see below). He became a naturalized British citizen and received his master’s certificate in 1886. For a year or more he traded among the inlets and coastal rivers of Borneo, Celebes, and Sumatra. Conrad’s first command was the bark Otago. Back in London, he began to write his first book, Almayer’s Folly, in 1889. A voyage in a Congo river steamer was later put to use in Heart of Darkness. He left the sea in 1894. During the next year Almayer’s Folly was published and he completed An Outcast of the Islands. In 1896 he married Jessie George. They settled in Essex. By 1900 he had written The Nigger of the “Narcissus,” Tales of Unrest, and Lord Jim. In 1903 he finished Typhoon and began the first of three collaborations with Ford Madox Hueffer (later Ford Madox Ford). In 1903–04, he sat for twenty months at a stretch at Pent Farm in Kent, writing Nostromo. The novel Chance brought him his first large public. He and his family barely managed to get out of Poland at the start of World War I. In 1923 Conrad went to sea for the last time on a triumphal visit to New York. He died of a heart attack at Oswalds, Bishopsbourne, August 3, 1924. Youth was published in 1902. Read it once and it belongs to us, as if it had become a part of our own experience. We see again that old bark, the Judea, gliding alone in the “colossal sapphire” of the Indian Ocean. We smell the faint cloud and reek of her burning cargo, the coal smoke drifting off to leeward. And we know—have we not been told at the beginning?—that nothing can be done for her. She has no luck. Only the patient will of her crew has brought her so far into the Eastern seas. But nothing can save her. Conrad understood, better perhaps than any major writer before or after him, the role of the professional in human society. He spoke of him in terms of the professional seaman, because that was what he knew best. But the professional might have been one of Stephen Crane’s United States Regulars in Cuba, or an airline pilot, or a public-health physician, or the workman who mends the leak in the gas main. He is the man who holds things together and keeps them going. He knows his job and does it, no matter what happens. Let us see how this works out in the narrative of Youth. First, the story is told by Marlow, a veteran seaman, to four ex-seamen—a closed circle of professionals. It is a story of Marlow’s own youth, touched with amused and affectionate wonder at the young man he had been. Above all, it is a story of misfortunes piled on top of each other until, like the smoke of the burning Judea, they reach into the sky. But no one complains. The October gale, the collision in the dock, the endless work at the pumps and the endless waiting—these are all part of the job. Even when she catches fire at sea and blows her deck out, Captain Beard’s first thought is to get the yards trimmed and the ship back on course. Men with the hair burned off their heads stumble and haul among masts that threaten to go overside at any moment. It does not occur to them to question the wisdom of this procedure. That is what they are there for. Even when the steamer offers to take them off and Captain Beard shouts back, “We must see the last of the ship,” no one protests. But a professional is only the working part of a man. His feelings are his own. Marlow faithfully remembers the truth of his own feelings. He was pleased—pleased at the extent and thoroughness of the ship’s disaster, and how well he had stood up to it. He recalls his first view of the East, a vision, suddenly real, of the remote, the mysterious, the unknown. “I remember my youth,” he said, “and the feeling that will never come back any more—the feeling that I could last for ever, outlast the sea, the earth, and all men….”