Author: Thomas De Quincey Born near Manchester, England, in 1785, Thomas De Quincey was the fifth of eight children. He himself would have eight. His father’s death left the family with an ample £ 1,600 a year. Though De Quincey earned his living at writing, he seems to have had a small personal income most of his life. In the public and private schools he went to, he was noted for two things: early brilliance in Latin and Greek and a habit of running away. On one of these excursions he spent a year or more in the rough Soho district of London (an episode mentioned in his Confessions of an English Opium-Eater). But afterward he described his growing up as “a youth passed in the divinest happiness.” In his second year at Oxford, he took opium for neuralgic pains and caught the habit. Four times in his life he went deep into the world of the drug; and four times broke out. On a visit to his mother near Bath he met Coleridge. When he left Oxford, De Quincey settled near Coleridge, Wordsworth, and Southey in the Lake District north of Liverpool. There he married Margaret Simpson and edited the Westmorland Gazette. In 1820 he went to London, where he was welcomed by Charles Lamb and his circle. A year later, his Confessions were appearing in the London Magazine and he was famous—a tiny, neat-boned man, hardly five feet three, handsome with an almost feminine delicacy, and one of the two most celebrated talkers (Coleridge was the other) in an age of great talkers. From that time on, he worked almost entirely for the magazines—Blackwood’s, Tait’s, the Edinburgh Literary Gazette—and his writings were not brought together until late in his career. After his wife died in 1837, he moved his family to Lasswade, near Edinburgh. The children grew up largely in the care of his eldest daughter. De Quincey moved from one rented room to another, each so full of books and papers that he could hardly turn around in it. He loved both solitude and society, and could never get enough of either. He had a great fondness for the human race in all its varieties, and the human race repaid him in kind. His children were enchanted with him. His friends found him a delightful companion. If there had been no creditors in the world, De Quincey might have been that monster of nature, a completely happy man. He died in Edinburgh on December 8, 1859. We may think of John Stuart Mill as the pure type of the man of ideas, English style. De Quincey, his older contemporary, is a rather more extreme specimen of the English man of letters. True, he spoke of himself as a “philosopher,” and wrote little fiction or poetry. Again, he was the author of The Logic of Political Economy and, like James Mill and his son, discussed Ricardo’s economic theories. But the difference between the man of ideas and the man of letters comes out strongly in his Literature of Knowledge and Literature of Power. If we read it through once, we are struck with its straightforwardness. De Quincey usually likes to stop and make soundings, or curve away from the subject and come back to it. This time he sticks to the point from beginning to end. The point is basic and major. Is it any better or more generally understood now than in De Quincey’s time? We may doubt it. There are, says De Quincey, two types of literature: the literature of knowledge and the literature of power. The function of the one is to teach—that is, convey information or ideas. The function of the other is to move the reader—that is, carry over or call forth emotion or action. The two may run together, and often do; but in function and nature they stand sharply apart. The literature of knowledge is perishable. It will hold only until more accurate knowledge can be found. De Quincey mentions Sir Isaac Newton’s Principia as an example of this. In the twentieth century, we have seen even the mechanics of Newton challenged by new theories. But the great works of the literature of power, De Quincey tells us, are “triumphant forever, as long as the languages exist in which they speak or can be taught to speak.” Such literature is “moral” and resembles “nature.” It nourishes the great truths of human feeling. Our second essay, On the Knocking at the Gate in Macbeth, is De Quincey’s interpretation of a great scene from the literature of power—in this case, Shakespeare’s Macbeth. He tells us that he had always been puzzled by the solemn effect of that knocking after the murder of the “gracious Duncan.” Why was it so chilling? He cautions us against trusting what he calls our “understanding,” by which he means the habit of seeing things as they are supposed to be rather than as they are. Then he comes back to Macbeth and explains how he waited and “clung to the problem” until it could be solved. The solution came to him in the case of a very accomplished English murderer, a “Mr. Williams,” in which there was also a knocking at the door. De Quincy understood that we “identify” with the murderer and share his fear of discovery. From that point on, he gives us a superb view of murder as an emotional experience for the murderer. His essay has still another value: it is a perfect little step-by-step example of how the imagination works.