Author: Isak Dinesen Isak Dinesen (pen name of Karen Dinesen, later Baroness Blixen) was born in Denmark in 1885. Her father was a venturesome naval officer who lived for a while as a trapper among the Indians in Minnesota. She grew up near the sea and said later that she could not remember when she had first sailed a boat. In the years before World War I, she studied painting in Copenhagen, Paris, and Rome. She recalled that time as a period of free and youthful gaiety. In 1914 she married Baron Bror von Blixen and went with him to British East Africa, later Kenya Colony. There, largely with capital borrowed from her family, they bought a big coffee plantation. It prospered. When they were divorced in 1921, Baroness Blixen took over the management of the estate. Much of the time she saw no fellow Europeans. She lived alone with the crews of fieldworkers and her household servants. She began to write, as she said, “to amuse myself in the rainy season.” Her Kikuyu servants would bow respectfully and ask “what God had now inspired me to write.” In 1931, when the bottom fell out of the world coffee market, she gave up the plantation and went back to live with her mother on the family estate at Rungstedlund, Denmark. She wrote Seven Gothic Tales in English. It was published in 1934. In Out of Africa, an account of her life on that continent, she returned to Danish. The English translation appeared in 1938. This was followed in 1943 by Winters Tales, which contained the remarkable Sorrow-Acre (see below). During the Nazi occupation of Denmark in World War II, a novel by one “Pierre Andrézel” was published. Censors passed it as a harmless “Gothic romance,” but the more knowing Danes recognized a satire on the invaders. In 1947 it came out in English, as The Angelic Avengers, under the proper pen name of its author, Isak Dinesen. She died in Denmark on September 7, 1962. The Danish stories of Isak Dinesen take us back to the half-feudal world of Sigrid Undset and Giovanni Verga, or to Turgenev’s A Sportsman’s Sketches. In all these works, what we feel is the feudal spirit. The story, in fact, might conceivably happen at any time from, say, the twelfth century to World War I. But in Sorrow- Acre the period is clearly suggested. Heavy four-horse coaches, young Adam’s hair caught with a ribbon, the powder in Sophie Magdalena’s hair—what can this be but the late eighteenth century, or at most the early nineteenth? Sorrow-Acre is no more than the story of a single day at a great Danish manor house, but it presents us with a human problem of such complexity that we can hardly be sure we understand it on first reading. Not that the story itself is difficult. Far from it. Indeed, it stirs us at once. Like Adam at first, we conceive a hot sympathy for the old woman and brush away all objections to it. Perhaps we are right. Why not? we ask ourselves. Certainly what happens to Anne-Marie bears no likeness to any sort of justice we know. We go over the facts again, as the old lord tells them to Adam. Someone has burned down the barn at Rødmose-gaard. Two men bring the boy Goske to the old lord and charge that they saw him near the barn that night. They are known to be hostile to him. He protests that he is innocent. The old lord orders him to be locked up. But the judge, he says, “is a fool, and would naturally do nothing but what he thought I wished him to do.” At this point the widow Anne-Marie, Goske’s mother, makes a weeping appeal for her son. Very well, says the old lord. If you can, between sunrise and sunset, reap this field of rye that we stand in with your own hands, your son may go free. And he adds that “the mowing of that field is a day’s work to three men, or three days’ work to one man.” A little later he murmurs the strangest sentence of all: “We are not quibbling with the law, Anne-Marie and I.” Monstrous! we say to ourselves. What sort of cat-and-mouse game is this? And what was it the old lord had said earlier—that “power is in itself the supreme virtue”? We remember that he too has lost his only son, taken from him by a power against which there is no appeal. We begin to piece things together, as Adam did. We do not have Adam’s reasons for love or gratitude. So, more quickly perhaps than Adam, we guess the secret. The old lord is playing god. And what kind of god? Perhaps, as he has hinted, a god like the Roman Jove, who knows nothing of good or evil because the nature of his own being is the necessity of the world. What if this necessity includes setting some old woman an all-but-impossible task if she wishes to save the life of her son? Like Adam, we listen to the old lord’s discourse on tragedy as “the right of human beings” and comedy as “a condescension of the divine to the world of man….” The old lord has made a decree. The old woman accepts it. Both have the sense that what is decreed must be. But there are compensations: like Adam, we hear the words of the little French song: “To die for what one loves/This is too sweet an effort….” We reflect that a mother may welcome the chance to sacrifice herself for her son, and that other people may find in it a great community of feeling. Is this what the old lord meant? Perhaps. But behind all this, we glimpse for a moment, as Adam does, the freedom of the New World, where every man has the right to his own feelings.