Author: Gustave Flaubert Gustave Flaubert was born in Rouen, France, on December 12, 1821. He grew up in the city hospital, where his father was chief surgeon. In 1837, while he was still in school, his work was first published in a review, Le Colibri. He visited the Pyrénées, Marseilles, and Corsica with the anatomist Jules Cloquet and studied law at the University of Paris. Nervous troubles and lack of interest caused him to drop out. After the death of his father and sister in 1846, he retired with his mother to the family estate at Croisset on the Seine, where he would spend most of his life. In the summer of that year he met the poet Louise Colet and began a nine-year association with her. A walking tour in Brittany with the writer Maxime du Camp produced By Fields and by Strands, published after his death. During this period he was engaged on manuscripts that would later be reworked into his famous books. In 1849–51 he and du Camp traveled in Egypt, Palestine, Syria, Turkey, Greece, and Italy. Five years of steady labor created Madame Bovary, perhaps the first modern novel. In 1856 it was brought out in the Revue de Paris and appeared as a book the next year. At once the French government indicted Flaubert on charges of immorality. He was acquitted. Six months later the same court convicted the poet Baudelaire for certain poems in Les Fleurs du mal. Flaubert traveled in North Africa and devoured whole libraries to produce Salammbô, a novel about Hamilcar’s daughter and the war between Carthaginians and mercenaries. The book, published in 1862 (dated 1863), was given a triumphant welcome. Like Henry James, Flaubert wrote plays and had little luck with them. The novel Sentimental Education, his great picture of Paris in mid-century, went largely unnoticed in the excitement that preceded the War of 1870. Then there were Prussians in Flaubert’s garden at Croisset. After the war, his niece’s husband was threatened with bankruptcy. Flaubert signed over his fortune to them. The Temptation of Saint An thony appeared in 1874. Three Tales, which included A Simple Heart, The Legend of St. Julian the Hospitaller (see below), and Hérodias, was published three years later. At his death, he had all but finished Bouvard and Pécuchet. He was the prime inventor of the modern novel, the first writer to treat the novel as an art and make it one. He died at Croisset on May 8, 1880. In 1846 Flaubert had seen and remembered a small statue of St. Julian at Caudebec. A stained-glass window in Rouen Cathedral, familiar to him since childhood, depicted episodes from St. Julian’s life. Out of such hints he began to weave the superb tapestry of The Legend of St. Julian the Hospitaller. Aside from his extreme Christian charity, Flaubert’s Julian bears little likeness to the saint. The canonized Julian was said to be an Egyptian who lived with his wife, Basilissa, “in perpetual chastity” and kept “a kind of hospital.” It is reported that his skull was brought into France and presented to Queen Brunehault in the time of St. Gregory the Great. Flaubert made a fresh beginning and created a medieval legend of great richness and power. Though it is written in sharp and compact modern French, it catches the tone and bare movement of the true medieval romance. It is graver and more realistic than such romans d’aventure as Aucassin and Nicolette. Its magic and super-natural touches remind us of the Breton romances. But when we have said these things, we cannot help but acknowledge the quite “modern” starkness of Julian’s mad hunting, the “modern” rightness of choice in each detail. Nor should we forget that Oedipus and Orestes too were condemned to the same fate as Julian, or what self-punishment they too found for themselves. Out of his sense of guilt, his need for self-punishment—to do penance, in the religious phrase—comes Julian’s humble and practical service to others. He does not call it love. But it is unlimited, as perfect love may be. He has risked his life many times, boldly, in hunting and war. Now he is willing to risk it again to save a loathsome fellow creature from freezing to death. So the Leper and Julian are both transformed. A miracle happens—the kind of miracle we encounter in the literature of every compassionate religion, because the need to help others, even at the risk of our lives, is a basic human trait of feeling. We are not surprised that Turgenev translated his friend’s tale into Russian. Readers of Dostoevsky and the later Tolstoy would understand it very well. But unlike Tolstoy, Flaubert allows no moralizing shadow to fall on his page. “Devotion to art was a law of his nature,” says the biographer Philip Spencer. From first to last the tale must be held to its own true shape and feeling. And what a triumph of selection and placement it is! What a living stir and color it has! St. Julian contains enough movement for a dozen historical novels, yet it remains perfectly in scale. We follow it as eagerly as if it were some trivial adventure story, convinced that even its phantoms and speaking animals are “true,” happy or grieved or horrified at Julian’s progress through a world of coarse sense and spirit. Does it tell us something about the mixture of masculine and feminine in our nature? Is it a parable of moral death and redemption? Or of perfect mystical union with Christ? Or do we find in Julian a symbol of man at war, who can be brought to love again only by overwhelming guilt and grief ?