Author: John M. Synge John Millington Synge was born near Dublin, on April 16, 1871. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and went to Germany, where he studied music. Later he settled in Paris with the young writers there and eked out a living writing literary criticism. The turning point in Synge’s life came when he met a fellow Irishman, William Butler Yeats, in Paris. Yeats took an interest in the young man, and became convinced that he would be a better writer if he gave up imitating the Paris literary fashions and became a truly Irish author. Yeats persuaded Synge, in 1893, to leave Paris and go to the Aran Islands to live the simple life of the Irish peasants there. This he did, soaking up the sound of the islanders’ speech and the substance of their legends. Yeats describes the young writer: “He was a solitary, undemonstrative man, never asking pity, nor complaining, nor seeking sympathy…all folded up in brooding intellect, knowing nothing of new books and newspapers, reading the great masters alone.” Synge’s sketches about the islanders were collected in The Aran Islands (1907). He spent the rest of his short life writing the plays of Irish peasant life for which he has become famous. His first two, The Shadow of the Glen (1903) and Riders to the Sea (1904), were produced by the Irish National Theatre Society. This group organized the famous Abbey Theatre in 1904. Synge, Yeats, and Lady Gregory were the directors. When Synge’s The Playboy of the West ern World was presented there, the audience rioted in anger at what they understood to be Synge’s criticism of Ireland. The play later helped make the Abbey Theatre world renowned. Synge’s poetry was collected in Poems and Translations (1909), and he had nearly completed his last play, Deirdre of the Sorrows, when he died in Dublin on March 24, 1909. Yeats wrote that Synge, like Shakespeare and other great playwrights, had a delight in language and a preoccupation with individual life. Another way of putting it is that Synge’s plays are, at the same time, poetic and realistic. These traits were the ones most highly valued in the Irish dramatic renaissance that was inspired and promoted by Yeats and the Irish Literary Theatre. Other Irish writers, including Yeats himself, had one or the other characteristic to a high degree. Synge mastered and mingled the two. Synge was a painstaking observer and listener. Not an inflection of Irish peasant speech nor a habit of body or thought escaped his notice. He did not judge his people nor fight for their causes. Rather, he accepted and understood them with compassion and respect. The Irish playwright was no mere reporter, however. He was a poet, with a poet’s ear for the music of speech and a poet’s grasp of symbolic meanings. He criticized Ibsen, whose realism he respected, for writing “in joyless and pallid words.” The rhythm of Synge’s beautiful Irish dialogue stays with us long after we have read his plays. Yeats said of Synge’s language: “It makes the people of his imagination disembodied; it gives them a kind of innocence even in their anger and cursing.” Riders to the Sea shows Synge at his best. His perfect little oneact play is a moving tribute to the power of humanity to endure even the greatest hardships. When Maurya mourns for her six fine sons, the lament is also for all beauty and strength that must die. After her last son has ridden away on the gray pony, death, to the sea’s oblivion, after her “crying and keening” are done, the old woman speaks in her wisdom to the young people who cannot understand their misfortune: “What more can we want than that? No man at all can be living for ever, and we must be satisfied.”