Author: Samuel Johnson Samuel Johnson was born in Lichfield, England, on September 18, 1709. His father, Michael, a bookseller, was sheriff of the city that year. From his father, Samuel inherited his large, powerful, though not entirely healthy, body; and in his father’s shop the boy gained an early interest in books. When he was young, Samuel Johnson suffered from scrofula, a disease which disfigured his face and injured his eyesight. He was educated at Lichfield Grammar School and at Oxford, where he stayed from October, 1728, until December, 1729. For the next few years, Johnson made a meager living teaching, translating, and writing. In 1735 he married a widow, Mrs. Elizabeth Porter, and set up a school at Edial, near Lichfield. The school failed and in 1737 he left for London, where he was to spend the rest of his life. During the next few years Johnson suffered poverty and enjoyed little success. He earned a living chiefly by writing for the Gentleman’s Magazine. In 1744 was published Johnson’s Life of Savage, a biography of his friend Richard Savage; and his poem The Vanity of Human Wishes appeared in 1749. But it was the publication of Johnson’s famous Dictionary of the English Language in 1755 that made his reputation. The Dictionary was an immediate success and was at once accepted as the standard authority. For two of the eight years he spent preparing the dictionary, Johnson supported himself in part by publishing a periodical, The Rambler (1750–52). Later, from 1758–60, he also published another periodical, The Idler. In 1762 Johnson was given a government pension which made him financially independent. His remaining years were comparatively easy, but the death of his wife in 1752 had been a great blow to him, and Johnson was never free from the periods of deep depression which had plagued him throughout his life. At meetings of The Literary Club, which Johnson helped found in 1764, his genius as a conversationalist was displayed. James Boswell recorded these conversations, as well as every quirk and peculiarity of the great man, so that we probably know more about Johnson than about any writer who ever lived. In 1765, Johnson brought out the long-awaited edition of Shakespeare’s plays, which he had been promising for nearly ten years. In 1779–81 was published Lives of the English Poets, prefaces written for a large collection of English poetry. He died on December 13, 1784, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Shakespeare has been more studied, as well as more read and played, than any English dramatist. Dr. Johnson’s critique, in the Preface that he wrote to his edition of the plays, reprinted below, is one of a long line of such works. Authors and editors had praised Shakespeare for a hundred years before Johnson’s birth; and, of course, the flood of praise and criticism has continued unabated until our time. But there is reason to believe that Johnson’s evaluation is the best general study of Shakespeare. If it is not the best, it is certainly important to read today. Modern criticism of Shakespeare tends to ignore the main point of Johnson’s critique. Much contemporary Shakespearean criticism seems to dehumanize Shakespeare, to treat him as difficult, strange, and recondite. It emphasizes the changes that his language has undergone, and points out the intricacy of his images. Doubtless such criticism is valuable. The complexities of Shakespeare should be observed and clarified. His uniquely involuted ironies and ambiguities should be understood. But one sometimes has the feeling that this criticism misses the forest for the trees. Johnson does not fail to see the forest; he is able to view, and to appreciate, Shakespeare as a whole. “Nothing can please many,” he writes, “and please long, but just representations of general nature.” Shakespeare’s characters, he goes on, “are not modified by the customs of particular places, unpractised by the rest of the world; by the peculiarities of studies or professions, which can operate but upon small numbers; or by the accidents of transient fashions or temporary opinions: they are the genuine progeny of common humanity, such as the world will always supply, and observation will always find.” “Shakespeare has no heroes,” Johnson adds in a later place; “his scenes are occupied only by men who act and speak as the reader thinks that he should himself have spoken or acted on the same occasion.” “This therefore is the praise of Shakespeare,” Johnson concludes, “that his drama is the mirror of life; that he who has mazed his imagination, in following the phantoms which other writers raise up before him, may here be cured of his delirious ecstasies, by reading human sentiments in human language, by scenes from which a hermit may estimate the transactions of the world, and a confessor predict the progress of the passions.” Johnson does not praise Shakespeare unreservedly. He has many criticisms which some modern readers consider carping: for example, that Shakespeare is sometimes morally slack, sometimes a poor storyteller, sometimes vulgar, sometimes ignorant, and that he too often indulges in punning. The reader of Johnson’s Preface will have to decide for himself whether the things that Johnson takes exception to should be condemned or condoned. But he should not forget the chief point. Shakespeare’s plays exhibit “the real state of sublunary nature,” Johnson writes, “which partakes of good and evil, joy and sorrow, mingled with endless variety of proportion and innumerable modes of combination…in which, at the same time, the reveller is hasting to his wine, and the mourner burying his friend; in which the malignity of one is sometimes defeated by the frolic of another; and many mischiefs and many benefits are done and hindered without design.” Shakespeare is the poet of life as we all know it and always will know it. Johnson is saying—and do we wish to dispute him?—that this is the highest praise which can be accorded any artist. Johnson’s Preface is useful and interesting for other reasons. It talks sense about the theater, and it talks sense, too, about the business of criticism. The sympathetic reader will not fail to derive delight from Johnson’s style. This is the “grand style,” so rare in English. The sentences are long and often complex, but they move like stately music to a deeply satisfying close. The combination of Shakespeare and Johnson is a wonderful one.