Author: Molière Jean Baptiste Poquelin (Molière) was born in Paris on January 15, 1622. His father, a well-to-do upholsterer and interior decorator, was a valet de chambre to the royal household. The boy’s mother died when he was ten. In 1636 he entered the Collège de Clermont, an aristocratic school that was reputed to be the best in Paris. There he learned logic and rhetoric under the Jesuit teachers and became familiar with Roman comedies. He studied law and could have either practiced that profession or followed his father’s. But he had become enthusiastic about the theater and in 1643, when he was twenty-one, helped to found a theatrical company, the Illustre Théâtre. He adopted his stage name, Molière. The company, of which the Béjart family was an important part—Madeleine Béjart was its star—rented a tennis court and began to produce plays. The enterprise was a financial failure, and Molière was imprisoned for debt. The company left Paris to tour the provinces, and Molière went with it. For thirteen years he traveled, mostly through southern France, appearing in this city and that, gaining priceless experience acting in and producing plays. By the time the company returned to Paris, Molière was its director, its leading actor, and the author of two plays of his own. In 1658 Louis XIV’s brother, Phillippe d’Orléans, took the company under his patronage, and from then on its success in Paris was assured. It was given the use of a hall in the Petit-Bourbon, next to the Louvre. Later, when this was torn down, the company performed in the Palais-Royal. The plays of Molière are still produced by the Comédie Française in this building. Molière presented tragedies by Corneille and others, and he wrote one tragedy himself. But it was a failure, and it became evident that the company would have to depend on farce and comedy. In 1662 Molière married Armande Béjart, a member of his company who was only half his age. The marriage was unhappy, for Armande’s flirtations seem to have been as frequent, and as public, as Célimène’s in The Misanthrope. For the rest of his life Molière turned out, at the rate of nearly two a year, the comedies which have made him famous as France’s greatest dramatist. In 1665 the king took over patronage of the company, and thereafter Molière produced many musical entertainments and extravaganzas for the royal family. Molière suffered during the last half of his life from tuberculosis. In February, 1673, he produced his play, Le Malade imaginaire (The Hypochondriac), in which he satirized the medical profession. On February 17 he suffered an attack while playing the title role in this play and died that evening. Because he had been an actor, he was refused the last rites of the Church and was buried with a simple ceremony on February 21. Molière has been called a skeptic. Insofar as it is possible to sum up such a complex person, the word seems to fit him. He questioned the worth of many of the accepted social institutions of his time. Like Swift, he valued reason above emotion, and entertained a low opinion of mankind. His radical ideas found expression in his plays, and some of them were banned by scandalized officials. But his character must have been exceptional, for though he was exposed to calumny and attack such as few men have had to face, nothing mean was ever charged to his personal account. The Misanthrope was presented on June 4, 1666. It was a relative failure. It has never been a great success on the stage, but it is generally held to be Molière’s greatest work. Seventeenth-century audiences may have found too little to laugh at. The play is a comedy, but there are tragic overtones. Molière himself had reasons for misanthropy. He had been violently attacked, his marriage was unhappy, his first-born son had died after a month, and he was ill and exhausted from overwork. Alcestes—played by Molière himself—cries out at the beginning of the play: “I want to be angry! I don’t want to listen!” Critics have found in such remarks as these, and in Alcestes’ undeviating demand that the world live up to his ideal, a reflection of Molière’s own feelings. Whether or not this is true, the play asks questions that might disturb any audience. Alcestes’ friend, Philintes, reminds him that the world will not change because he wants it to. Probably everyone has moods, however, in which that fact is not very comforting. Few are willing to lose everything, as Alcestes does, for the sake of their ideals. But it is difficult not to agree with Éliante’s judgment that there “is something rather noble and heroic” about Alcestes. He is certainly “unreasonable.” But if everyone were “reasonable” about the injustice and hypocrisy of the world, where would we be? Célimène—who was played by Molière’s young wife—is a masterly creation. She is charming, intelligent, articulate—and she seems to love Alcestes. But she is spoiled for him because she does not respond as he does to the world’s evil. She likes the world, she is “reasonable” about hypocrisy, though she certainly does not approve of it, and she is not willing to risk everything on a quixotic pursuit that is bound to fail. Philintes, too, is masterly. He is the epitome of the man of the world—calm, sensible, a success. There is nothing evil about him; Molière seems to be saying that one can be good and still prosper in life. The relation between the two friends is particularly rich. At the end of the play, Philintes promises to try to save Alcestes from himself. We can hope that the two men will mutually improve each other. Molière is said to have clowned the part of Alcestes, to have made him ridiculous, even grotesque. He may have been trying to temper the undeniable sadness of the play. It ends in a way no other great comedy ends: with the stage almost empty, the hero alone, lost, in despair. If the audience wanted to leave the theater laughing, they must have been disappointed. Molière felt a deep sense of obligation to his audience, and, besides, he wrote and produced plays for a living. He seems to have set to work, as soon as he saw what would be The Misanthrope’s reception, on an old farce which the company may have played in the provinces. The new work appeared on August 6, 1666, with the title Le Médecin malgré lui (The Doctor in Spite of Himself), and it was an immediate and continuing hit. It is a farce, and Molière loved farces. He himself played the part of Sganarel, and he made the theater ring and the audience howl. The fact that the play satirizes doctors is, perhaps, of little importance. Molière was a great entertainer, and to make an audience happy made him happy, too. The Doctor in Spite of Himself has been making audiences happy for three hundred years. It runs second only to Tartuffe in the number of recorded performances of Molière’s plays. The play should be read not as an intellectual document but as an entertainment. In particular, the reader might practice his own acting and read it—or parts of it—aloud to himself. The timing of the lines, the look of the actors, the stage “business” that we can imagine being performed—these are the essence of the play. They are what make it wonderful. If it “means” anything, it is that the world, besides being tragicomic, can also be seen as utterly mad.