Author: Charles Dickens Charles Dickens was born in Landport, now a section of Portsea, England, February 7, 1812. His father clerked for the Navy Pay Office. A convivial, easygoing man, he was held for a time in Marshal-sea debtors’ prison. Young Charles got little schooling. For some months he was put to work in a blacking warehouse. He served in an attorney’s office, became a shorthand writer and a first-rate Parliamentary reporter. His first book, Sketches by Boz, was published in 1836. That same year he married Catherine Hogarth and began to bring out The Pickwick Papers (see below) in monthly parts. Before the year was out his tremendous audience had found him. It grew with the publication of Oliver Twist in 1838 and Nicholas Nickleby a year later. The Old Curiosity Shop and Barnaby Rudge followed in 1841. Dickens was handsomely received on his first tour of the United States but the acid tone of American Notes outraged his transatlantic readers. In 1843–45 he settled in Genoa and toured Italy and France on the way back to England. During this period, Martin Chuzzlewit, A Christmas Carol, and The Chimes appeared. Dickens founded the London Daily News but soon returned to the Continent. In Paris he met Chateaubriand, Dumas and Victor Hugo. By March, 1847, he was back in London, working on Dombey and Son. The monthly parts of David Copperfield, probably his most widely read novel, began to appear in 1849. He founded the periodical Household Words in 1850. Publication of Bleak House, the first of his somber later novels, began in 1852. It was followed by Hard Times and Little Dorrit. In June, 1857, he gave the first of his public readings in London. About this time he was separated from his wife and his association with the actress Ellen Ternan began. In 1859 he published A Tale of Two Cities and set up a new periodical, All the Year Round. During the early 1860’s, in the midst of many lectures, he found time to write Great Expectations and Our Mutual Friend. His second tour of the United States in 1867–68 was an unparalleled triumph. In his time he was the most popular novelist in English and earned his rank among the greatest. He began publication of his unfinished novel, The Mystery of Edwin Drood, just before he died on June 9, 1870. The celebrated Mr. Pickwick, famous alike for his round and rosy good nature and his incomparable intellect, has got himself into a pickle. Indeed, it is one of the most renowned pickles in all literature—the pickle of Bardell v. Pickwick, tried under Mr. Justice Stareleigh at Guildhall, London, on February 14 in some imaginary year of the late 1820’s. Mr. Pickwick stands accused of the most horrible, monstrous and unnatural crime ever bound into law calf. It is nothing less than breach of promise. He is charged with having defaulted on a promise of marriage to a respectable female—to wit, a certain Mrs. Bardell, his former landlady, widow of a customhouse officer and mother of that “little villain,” Master Bardell. So we are into Pickwick Papers, a great book that is not so much a book as a world. In it Dickens first discovered the huge power of his own talent and went a little mad with the fun of it. He never wrote a book quite like it again. Perhaps no one ever will. We can read it for a week. Many a man has read it for a lifetime. We can eat it, and sleep in it, and dream about it, and never once wish we were somewhere else or doing something else. Of how many great books can this be said? In our excerpt, we meet Mr. Pickwick on one of the critical days in his life. Two things happen: he is caught in a horribly false posi tion with Mrs. Bardell, and he engages the incomparable Sam Weller as his manservant. A few pages back we had the pleasure of meeting Sam for the first time, complete with striped waistcoat, white hat, and red neckerchief, in the yard at the White Hart Inn. There, in consideration of a sovereign passed from hand to hand, Sam had been able to assist Mr. Pickwick, Mr. Wardle, and Mr. Perker the lawyer in thwarting the marriage plans of Mr. Jingle. In a book in which nearly everyone else is funny without quite meaning to be, Sam Weller is funny by wit and intention. Edwin Pugh, a specialist in Cockney life, wrote that the average Cockney “is often witty; he is sometimes eloquent; he has a notable gift of phrase-making and nicknaming.” All this applies to Sam, who is far from average. He is, in fact, the Great Cockney, the Cockney of Cockneys. His aplomb is limited but complete, his competence unfailing. He is an Odysseus who “is never at a loss”; and like any Homeric hero, he speaks in metaphors. His worldliness in the world of London—and of England, for that matter—shows never a crack. Thus he is the good right hand, and precisely the right one, for that confederation of innocents, the Pickwick Club, and especially for Mr. Pickwick himself. Who but the self-possessed young Mr. Weller would have been able to catch Mrs. Bardell’s gossip cronies in an indiscretion—to wit, the revelation that the shysters Dodson and Fogg had taken her case on speculation? And who but Sam, on the witness stand, would have been able to make such good use of it with the lawyers who had reduced Mr. Winkle to the point of burying his head under the sofa cushions? We tend to forget how much Dickens—the young Dickens, at least—was a man of the Romantic movement, blood brother to Pushkin, Lamb, Scott, the early Balzac and the Gogol of Dead Souls. The Pickwick Papers belongs among the great and few Romantic comedies; and the story of Mr. Pickwick’s involvement with Mrs. Bardell and the law is one of its crowning episodes.