Author: Sherwood Anderson Sherwood Anderson was born in Camden, Ohio, on September 13, 1876. His boyhood as a member of a sturdy poor man’s family became a long wandering from one Middle Western backwater town to another. He got little schooling. He learned the trade of life as a newsboy, house painter, farm hand, warehouse worker and race-track swipe. He wrote later that he had “always understood horses better than men.” He joined the army during the Spanish-American War and served in Cuba as a corporal. When he got back, he put in a year of study at Wittenberg Academy in Ohio and became an advertising writer in Chicago. For a while he managed a paint factory in Ohio. One day in 1913 he walked out in the middle of dictating a letter, went back to Chicago and wrote advertising copy while he worked at his own writing. A first novel, Windy McPherson’s Son, was published in 1916, and Marching Men the next year. In 1919 he made his name with Winesburg, Ohio, a suite of stories that compose into the picture of a small town more repressive than Fitzgerald’s Hades or Sinclair Lewis’ Gopher Prairie. Anderson followed this with the novel Poor White. He received the first Dial Award of $2,000 in 1921, the same year in which a second collection of stories, The Triumph of the Egg, was published. During this period he joined the Port of New York group that included Paul Rosenfeld, Waldo Frank, Lewis Mumford, and Alfred Stieglitz. He spoke for them too when he said that “Americans had to begin to stay, in spirit at least, at home. We had to accept our materials….” In two later novels, Many Marriages and Dark Laughter, his sense of the interior flow of feeling in his characters brought him close to D.H.Lawrence. In 1925 he settled in Marion, Virginia, where he published both the Democratic and the Republican newspapers. He wrote three volumes of autobiography: A Story Teller’s Story, Tar: a Midwest Childhood and the posthumous Memoirs. He was taken ill aboard a cruise ship and died in Colón, Panamá, on March 8, 1941. The story which follows, I’m a Fool, appeared in Anderson’s 1923 volume of stories, Horses and Men. Like Turgenev’s short novel and Galsworthy’s The Apple-Tree, it is a story of first love. These three narratives turn on a conflict between the emotion of the lovers and the social circumstances in which they are caught. When Hemingway’s work first began to be published, a few critics suggested that he had learned his style from Anderson. Anderson disclaimed this. To us too it seems much more likely that—as Hemingway pointed out later in his own case—each had derived a style from The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. In that book, Twain wrote that he had employed seven Middle Western dialects. These, he said, were set down “not in a haphazard fashion, by guesswork; but painstakingly, and with the trustworthy guidance and support of personal familiarity….” For all three writers, “personal familiarity” with the common talk of their region must have been the main source. The problem was how to transform it into a literary language. Sometimes Anderson solved this very well, sometimes badly. At his worst, he could write the colloquial as if he had learned it in a three-months’ correspondence course; and his years of advertising writing betrayed him now and again into a twisted syntax that had little to do with conventional prose or any spoken language. All these aspects of Anderson’s work, plus strong echoes of Huckleberry Finn, appear in I’m a Fool. But in this story, as is usually the case with Anderson, faithfulness to human meaning is the thing; and here he triumphs. It is simply told, but it is not simple. It suggests much more than the narrator tells us, and it is full of hidden ironies he is not aware of. It is, at bottom, a story of love versus custom and convention. Anderson gives us the delicate shades of social feeling. We see finally, as indeed the narrator himself does, that the conflict has largely taken place inside him. Would it have been any different if he had told the Wessens and Miss Woodbury who he was and what kind of work he did? They are not snobs. We feel at least, as he does, that the future might have been open to him. Is it closed now? He believes that it is. His folly has closed it. But what is this folly, after all? What youth has not lied to impress a girl—and if he has not, what sort of youth is he? If the narrator could lie well enough to convince his new friends, why did he lack the wit to talk himself out of it afterwards? We see why. He is paralyzed with guilt, not at the lie itself, but at the nature of it. He feels that he has given himself away—literally, as he says, made a fool of himself. Here we need to recall what the American small town was like in the late nineteenth century. Underneath the genuine good nature of its democratic manners, it had settled into a caste system. This was what Mark Twain’s Hannibal had come to. It would be broken up in its turn by the changes after World War I. The narrator protests to himself that he is as good as the next man. He does not feel it. And once he has been accepted by his new friends as what he is not, he feels free to think of ordinary people as “yaps” and the “common kind of cattle.” So he prepares his own grief.