Author: Ivan Bunin Ivan Bunin was born in Voronezh, Russia, October 10, 1870. His family belonged to the old landed nobility. Bunin grew up on his father’s estates in central Russia. A painter at first, he turned early to writing. His first poems came out in 1889. He was twice awarded the Pushkin Prize, the second time for his translation of Longfellow’s Hiawatha. In 1909 he was elected one of the Twelve Honorary Academicians of the Russian Academy. Leo Tolstoy was also one of the twelve. In his youth Bunin was a Tolstoyan, dedicated to good works and making barrel hoops. He met the Master, a tall old man who came at him with a frighteningly quick stride and spoke gently. In Moscow Bunin was associated with the writers Leonid Andreev and Maxim Gorky and the singer Feodor Chaliapin. He was so thin that the painter Ilya Repin asked him to model for one of his angels. Bunin traveled all over Russia and visited Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Algeria, Tunisia, and the tropics. At Yalta, he and Anton Chekhov were close friends. They had a game, each repeating to the other some solemn remark the critics had made about him. “You are ‘a man of crystal purity,’” Chekhov would say. Bunin would reply by calling him “the singer of twilight moods.” Bunin’s novel The Village appeared in 1910. It was one of the first books to break down the traditional idealization of the Russian people in literature. Dismayed by the “utterly intolerable spectacle” of the Revolution, Bunin moved to South Russia in May, 1918. He left the country for good in February, 1920. Such works as The Gen tleman from San Francisco, Suchodol, An Evening in the Spring, and The Dreams of Chang and Other Stories made him known all over the world. He lived an exile’s life in Paris and at Grasse in Provence. His later works include The Well of Days, Dark Avenues, and Memories and Portraits. In 1933 Bunin was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature. He died in Paris on November 8, 1953. When hen we read The Gentleman from San Francisco for the first time, we are so enchanted by the shimmer of a multitude of details that we hardly notice anything else. Even so, we are aware that this detail is not simply piled up, as Zola might do it. Whether it refers to the snowy winter sea, a crystal chandelier, or a little Sicilian horse, it evokes whatever it touches. We can see it and feel it. It is there. The story is created out of it. Then we notice that this detail is of two kinds, one continually played off against the other. The first is our actual world of work, hardship, and weather, but also of light on the sea, of that Italy where each island “has its especial aroma” after rain. The other is the luxury world of the transatlantic liners and the grand hotels, in which the traveler does not need to do anything at all. His whole duty consists in answering the gong—that ironic gong!—for dinner, like one of Pavlov’s salivating dogs. For a moment, at the crisis of the story, the author brings these two worlds together. Is it a period story? We feel that it is, that the author meant it to be that. Its time is easy to guess: the period not long before World War I. The travelers take tea, not cocktails, at five o’clock. Women are evidently not permitted in the ship’s bar. The Chinese stewards wear queues. But the sense of period is conveyed to us by other and more subtle intimations—by the naïveté of that young couple aboard the Atlantida hired to “play at love,” and by the general sense, displayed in the attitudes of everyone from the San Francisco gentleman to Luigi the bell-boy, that this dream world is completely insulated, permanent, and untouchable. No one knew better than Bunin that it was not. Moreover, we are aware that these two contrasted worlds are also two exclusive worlds of people. Each is covertly hostile to the other. The Gentleman from San Francisco is offended by the sight of the fishermen’s miserable stone huts; after his death, Luigi the waiter mocks him with his obsequious “Ha sonato, Signore?” at the door. Here are the two worlds of those who serve and those who are served. Those who are served, the San Franciscan and his family, are nameless. The “hereditary prince of a certain Asiatic kingdom” is not merely nameless, he is “travelling incognito”—a double loss of identity. Symbolic figures moving in a dream have no need of identity. They are simply kinds of people: ticketed, consigned from one port to another, summoned by gongs, unobtrusively guarded to see that they do not get out of step. And it comes to us suddenly, in a kind of ironic reversal, that these travelers are servants too—of their schedules, of their arrangements, of the need to do and see everything, to get their money’s worth. They are servants, too, of their pleasure. They are going to Europe “for two whole years…solely for the sake of pleasure.” Finally, the dead man is the servant of those forces—“the darkness, the ocean, the snow storm”—which govern and control all transient things.