Author: Herman Melville Herman Melville, of Scottish, Dutch, and Irish stock, was born in New York City on August 1, 1819. His father’s business failure and death left Herman’s mother with eight children to bring up. He tried schoolteaching. At nineteen he signed on a Liverpool trader. In January, 1841, he shipped aboard the whaler Acushnet outbound for the South Seas. The following year he and a companion jumped ship at Nukuhiva, in the Marquesas Islands, and lived for a while as compulsory guests of the Taipi tribe. He reached Tahiti aboard the Australian whaler Lucy Ann. After a short imprisonment there, another whaler, Charles and Henry, brought him to Maui in the Hawaiian (then Sandwich) Islands. In Honolulu, on August 17, 1843, he signed on the frigate United States as an ordinary seaman. He saw fourteen months of sea duty and was discharged in Boston. That winter of 1844–45 he began to write Typee. It was published the next year in England and the United States. He was famous at once as “the man who had lived among cannibals.” Omoo appeared in 1847, and was equally popular. He married Elizabeth Shaw, daughter of the Chief Justice of Massachusetts, and joined the New York literary coterie. In 1849 he published Mardi and Redburn. That year he made a brief voyage to England and the Continent. In 1850 White-Jacket appeared. Melville settled near Pittsfield, Massachusetts, where he met Nathaniel Hawthorne and began Moby Dick, his masterpiece. The publication of that work in 1851, and of Pierre a year later, quenched his reputation as a popular writer. Israel Potter, The Piazza Tales, and The Confidence-Man appeared between 1855 and 1857. In 1856 to 1857 Melville traveled in Europe and the Holy Land. He tried lecturing and in 1860 accompanied his brother, master of the clipper ship Meteor, on a voyage to San Francisco. In 1866 he was made a District Inspector of Customs in New York and remained at that post until 1885. During this period he published two volumes of poetry, Battle-Pieces and Clarel. Two others appeared later. Even if he had written nothing else, Moby Dick would have earned him a place among the highest in American and world literature. He died in New York City on September 28, 1891. In the early winter of 1888, Melville set out to write Billy Budd, his last great work. He began a first revision and enlargement in March, 1889. The book, left in an all but final state at his death, remained unpublished until Raymond M.Weaver brought it out in 1924 as a part of his Melville revival. It was later turned into a play, a motion picture, and an opera composed by Benjamin Britten. Many critics have come to regard it as second only to Moby Dick in the Melville canon. It is, like so much of Melville’s work, a story of the sea—and what a story it is! We discover at once, as in Hugo’s account of the cannon adrift or Scott’s The Two Drovers, that the story is inseparable from its meaning. We have hardly got well into it before we begin to ask ourselves questions. We notice that these questions are chiefly ethical and philosophical. What is the nature of good and evil in human beings? Are these qualities inborn or taught? Must we make a distinction between law and justice? If so, which must we observe? Is there a justice according to law and a justice of the heart? Moreover, we observe that these questions originate, not as ideas, but in our feelings about the characters. Claggart, the master-at-arms, falsely denounces Billy Budd to Captain Vere as a plotter of mutiny. Captain Vere summons Budd to face the charge. He, tongue-tied with horror, strikes out at Claggart and kills him. At once Captain Vere convenes a court-martial to try Budd. Is this proper? The other officers and the surgeon feel that the matter should be referred to the admiral. This is evidently in accord with the laws and regulations then in force in the British navy. Harrison Hayford and Merton M.Sealts, Jr., who have made a full study of Billy Budd, and whose text follows, show that the Mutiny Act cited by Melville clearly applied to British land forces, not to the navy. Moreover, naval regulations provided that a death sentence for any act other than mutiny must not be carried out until it had been reviewed and affirmed by the Admiralty or the squadron or fleet commander. Budd is not being tried for any mutinous act—no one, not even Claggart, believed him guilty of that—but for killin an officer. Thus Captain Vere, far from being a letter-of-the-law man, is clearly exceeding his authority in convening a court-martial and executing sentence. More than that, he has made up his mind beforehand that Budd must die. The sentence of the court is in effect a directed verdict. Why? Even if Captain Vere believed that his actions were legal, his great sympathy for Budd—so great, in fact, that the French critic Mayoux has suggested that he might be Budd’s natural father—darkens the mystery. Did he believe that, against the background of recent mutiny, Budd must be made a swift example? How did he know that this would not rouse the crew? We speculate, as Melville intended we should. Is Billy Budd meant to be a Christ figure? Are he and Claggart the respective symbols of good and evil? Is the novel first of all a social criticism of a barbarous time? Or is it Melville’s final “testament of acceptance”? “Acceptance” of injustice in the name of social order? Or is it all meant to be taken as dark irony? We go on questioning. But we notice that, in all our questions, we hold to our feeling of common humanity in the face of every circumstance that threatens it.