Author: Stephen Crane Stephen Crane, the fourteenth child of a Methodist Episcopal clergyman in Newark, New Jersey, was born on November 1, 1871. He spent one term at Lafayette College and another at Syracuse University, where he played varsity baseball. At that time he began a first novel, later called Maggie. Crane paid for its printing in 1893. Scarcely a copy was sold. He was a thin, blond young man of less than medium height. His gray-blue eyes saw everything. From late 1892 until 1896 he was in and out of New York City. He made an occasional living from newspaper assignments along Park Row. In 1895 a newspaper syndicate sent him on a trip to the West and into Mexico. There he was chased by a “fashionable bandit.” Crane, a good rider, got away. The same year he published The Black Riders, a book of poems, and The Red Badge of Courage, his brilliant novel about the Civil War. (He had never seen a battle.) The Red Badge, hardly noticed at first, reacted to praise from England and went through fourteen American printings in 1896. In that one year The Red Badge, Mag gie, and the poems came out in England. Another novel, George’s Mother, appeared in London and New York. Crane became the most talked about young writer of his period. Early in 1897 he was aboard the tugboat Commodore, outbound with arms for the Cuban insurgents. She sank off the Florida coast. The Open Boat derived from this misadventure. In Jacksonville he met Cora Stewart, daughter of a Boston artist. She was with him, as perhaps the first woman war correspondent, when he covered the Greco-Turkish War in 1897. Later she became his common-law wife. They settled in England, welcomed by such friends as Harold Frederic, Henry James, and Joseph Conrad. The Spanish-American War began in April, 1898. Crane, back in New York, was rejected by the Navy. As a correspondent, he got into much of the land fighting around Santiago de Cuba. He was cited for bravery. In January, 1899, he returned to England, where Cora had found an old manor house in Sussex. His last year of work was the final battle in a war against debt, illness, and time. He was taken to a sanitarium in Germany. There he died of tuberculosis, aged twenty-eight, on June 5, 1900. In the delirium of his last illness in the Black Forest, Crane talked about “changing places” in the boat. “By the very star of truth,” he had written, “it is easier to steal eggs from under a hen than it was to change seats in the dinghy.” His wife knew what boat he meant. It was a ten-foot dinghy, built for pulling in to the wharf in quiet harbors. It rode the sea, among swells “most wrongfully and barbarously abrupt and tall.” This was the boat that brought Crane and three other men to the beach at Daytona after the sinking of the Commo dore. He wrote the story quickly, after the event, in Jacksonville. Conrad, a veteran seaman, thought it a great story; and H.G.Wells said it was “beyond all question, the crown of all his work.” It needs no interpretation. Everything is there, in the story. What could be plainer than this day and night and morning in the indifferent universe of the sea, with life or death at the end of it? It is every man’s life in miniature. Crane caught it when it first took fire in his imagination, while the recollection was still fresh. His all but instinctive sense of form told him where to begin and where to stop. He gives us the tugboat’s sinking in one remembered image: “…a stump of a topmast with a white ball on it, that slashed to and fro at the waves, went low and lower, and down.” After that everything is contained in the Greek unities of a boat, four men, the sea, the sky, and the land. Like the poet Rimbaud, Crane deliberately made himself “a testing ground for all the sensations of living.” He was a man who had to find out how things worked and how they felt. The discovery of this truth of feeling was his business, in baseball (he said it had taught him about war), in rowing a dinghy in the open sea, or in war itself. The things that other people dismissed as mere sensation—“sport” or “adventure” or “war”—were simply life to him. He lived them with the same faithful intensity he gave to the observation of a dog’s behavior or a boy’s gang fight. This is what made it possible for Crane to create that sense of the raw world we get in The Open Boat and in the best of his other stories. He was called an “impressionist.” The label was false. He was no passive receiver of impressions. His point of vision, in life as in his stories, was that of a participant in the given action. The “psychology” of the men in The Open Boat is almost purely a matter of dealing with their situation, plus the sense of community that comes out of that. Even the correspondent’s reflections are only an extension of these feelings. Such treatment might have produced a melodrama. It is lifted into art by the detachment of Crane’s style: by the surprises of the poet, the precision of the man of action, the oblique angle of the ironist.