Author: Henry James Henry James was born in New York City, on April 15, 1843. He was the second son of the Swedenborgian philosopher Henry James, Sr., and brother of the psychologist William James. In the year of his birth the future novelist made his first visit to Europe. He grew up largely in Albany, New York, and New York City. His education was a planned succession of governesses, tutors, schools, and travel experiences in the United States, Switzerland, Germany, France, and England. In 1860–62 he lived in Newport, Rhode Island. A spinal injury incurred with a volunteer fire company probably kept him out of the Civil War and forced him to leave Harvard Law School. In Boston he wrote criticism, travel articles, and short stories. By 1875 he had decided to live in Europe. He settled first in Paris, where Turgenev, Flaubert, Maupassant, and Zola became his friends. In the following year he moved to London. His first full-length novel, Roderick Hudson, was published in 1876. During this early period he wrote The American, The Portrait of a Lady (said to have been studied from his beloved cousin, Minny Temple, who died young), Daisy Miller, Washington Square, and The Aspern Papers. He made extended visits to the United States, France, and Italy. Beginning in 1889, he tried hard but unsuccessfully to break into the theater. Only two plays of his were produced: The American and Guy Domville. In the 1890’s he published a long row of such distinguished works as The Tragic Muse, What Maisie Knew, The Lesson of the Mas ter, and The Turn of the Screw. He moved to Lamb House in Rye, Sussex. The American Scene came out of a visit to the United States in 1904–05. The Wings of the Dove, The Ambassadors, and The Golden Bowl belong among the great novels of his final period. During World War I he became a naturalized British subject and was awarded the Order of Merit. He died on February 28, 1916. In one of the prefaces to the New York Edition of his works, Henry James tells how the suggestion for The Pupil came to him. On a summer day, he writes, “in a very hot Italian railway-carriage,” a physician friend “happened to speak to me of a wonderful American family, an odd, adventurous, extravagant band, the most interesting member of which was a small boy, acute and precocious, afflicted with a heart of weak action….” Its imaginative power, James adds, might well have come out of “an old latent and dormant impression, a buried germ, implanted by experience and then forgotten….” Van Wyck Brooks suggests that this must have been a recollection of the Sargent family—its most famous member was the painter John Singer Sargent—who “wandered like gypsies all over Europe, from Biarritz to Venice, to Switzerland, to Paris, ‘living one year like ambassadors and the next like paupers’ as Henry James was to describe them in his story ‘The Pupil’….” If this is so, the Sargents must have undergone a striking change when James turned them into the Moreens. They became what the Sargents had probably never been— “a houseful of Bohemians who wanted tremendously to be Philistines.” And what is a Philistine? A prosperous conservative who has no use for artists. Out of the Moreens’ desire to be fashionable and secure, without having the means for it, comes all the falseness that Morgan and his young American tutor find in them. They try to present a solvent and conventional face to the world. They are Bohemians only in private and by necessity. This gives them a resemblance to a troupe of actors who must never be off guard, who must never forget to pretend that they are not acting. James makes an amusing thing of it. In a series of light touches he gives us Mr. Moreen, with his white mustache and his “ribbon of a foreign order”; the eternal macaroni and coffee; the talk about “good places”—“as if they had been pickpockets or strolling players”; and the villa at Nice with “a carriage, a piano and a banjo….” But the story hinges on the friendship between Pemberton, the tutor, and young Morgan Moreen. Morgan himself—because he is “a genius,” as his mother says? because he has a weak heart?—is treated with “a genuine tenderness, an artless admiration….” By that very sign he is an outsider. He is not privy to the family secrets. He must find them out for himself—and does. He and Pemberton make a small union of outsiders. They are at once ironic spectators and hopelessly involved. They have a common longing to escape; but there is no future for them outside the trap of the family. Do we have misgivings of a sort that James, for once, does not seem to have anticipated? “I think a position in society is a legitimate object of ambition,” he remarked once. So we are a little dismayed perhaps when young Morgan and his tutor assume the right to judge “such people” as the Moreens. Pemberton, in fact, reflected that “they were adventurers because they were toadies and snobs.” Perhaps they are “toadies and snobs” by nature. But they are adventurers because they have no money, or too little to be any use to them. They live like prospective heirs borrowing against an inheritance that will never come.