Author: Sir Francis Bacon Francis Bacon was born on January 22, 1561, in London, England. His father, Sir Nicholas Bacon, was Lord Keeper of the Seal to Queen Elizabeth I. In 1573 Bacon entered Trinity College, Cambridge. He left, in 1576, and went abroad with the ambassador to France to learn the arts of diplomacy. When his father died suddenly, in 1579, he returned to England. There he studied law and was admitted to the bar in 1582. The Earl of Essex befriended Bacon and tried to help him in his career. Later, when Essex was tried for treason, Bacon took a leading role in the prosecution and helped to bring about Essex’ execution. This action has never been entirely understood. When James I came to the throne, Bacon’s career advanced rapidly. He became Attorney General in 1613, Lord Keeper of the Seal in 1617, and Lord Chancellor in 1618. He was made Baron Verulam in 1618 and Viscount St. Albans in 1621. Bacon defended the King’s policies against Parliament, which brought him into conflict with the great lawyer Sir Edward Coke. In 1621 Bacon was accused of taking bribes in his position as Lord Chancellor. The practice of receiving gifts was an old one, to which Bacon pleaded guilty. He claimed, however, that his judgment was not swayed by the gifts. Bacon was sentenced to prison, heavily fined, and disqualified from holding office. The prison sentence and fine were not enforced, but Bacon spent the rest of his life in writing and scientific research rather than in public office. Because of Bacon’s insistence that scientists should reach conclusions solely by experiment, he is considered one of the founders of the modern scientific method. Bacon’s philosophical writings are in the two completed parts of what he planned as a huge work, the Instauratio magna, or “Great Reconstruction of Philosophy.” His Essays, published in 1597, are famous for their shrewdness and epigrammatic style. He died on April 9, 1626, after catching a cold while trying to see if meat could be preserved in snow. Francis Bacon was a master of the aphorism. The first sentences of his essays are often particularly brilliant and memorable. People have been quoting them for three hundred years. “Virtue is like a rich stone, best plain set,” the essay Of Beauty begins. It is not only a trenchant phrase. It also sets the tone and makes the point of the entire essay. Physical beauty is, in itself, nothing to be proud of, Bacon is saying. “Beauty is as summer fruits, which are easy to corrupt, and cannot last,” he writes. True beauty is inside, where virtue is; true beauty is in action, not in seeming. But Bacon also says that “virtue is best in a body that is comely, though not of delicate features.” Virtue and beauty together make a fine package. The advice Bacon gives in Of Discourse is as good as we are likely to find on the subject anywhere. Above all, do not be a bore, he says, and do not be rude. There are some subjects that should not be joked about, especially if it is done only to exhibit our own wit. It is both useful and polite to ask questions, but they should be chosen to put the other person in a good light rather than to expose his lack of knowledge. Perhaps the best advice of all is this: “Speech of a man’s self ought to be seldom.” Of Studies contains some of Bacon’s most famous sentences. For example: “Crafty men contemn studies, simple men admire them, and wise men use them.” There is much truth in that. Again: “Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested.” This is often quoted without the explanation that follows. “That is,” Bacon says, “some books are to be read only in part; others to be read, but not curiously (i.e., carefully); and some few to be read wholly, and with diligence and attention.” Less famous, but perhaps even more interesting, is the sentence: “Reading maketh a full man; conference a ready man; and writing an exact man.” Each part of this statement deserves a full discourse. We do not really know our own thoughts unless we can write them down. Quickness of wit (which Bacon calls readiness) comes from conversation. The silent man is too often slow of mind. And without the ability and willingness to read, we are empty things. So much of the world is closed to us without books. The style of Bacon’s essays is special and quite unique to him, though others have attempted to imitate it. Not a word is wasted. His entire output in the form—some fifty-eight essays—would, if closely printed, fill hardly a hundred pages. Yet those hundred pages would contain as much wisdom as most libraries. The cold, piercing brain of this distant, unknowable man saw through to the realities. We may not always like him and what he says, but we cannot deny that what he says is largely true, and relevant to our own concerns.