Author: Honoré de Balzac Honoré Balzac (he adopted the aristocratic de about 1831) was born in Tours, France, on May 20, 1799. He studied law at the University of Paris. In 1819 his family gave him a starvation allowance to try literature. He wrote a verse tragedy, Cromwell. For five or six years he worked as a journalist, fathered stillborn magazines, and turned out romantic thrillers by the yard. A speculation in publishing, printing, and type founding crashed in 1828, leaving him heavily in debt to his mother and his friend Madame de Berny. A first novel under his own name, The Last Chouan (later The Chouans), was published in 1829. The Physiology of Marriage, in the following year, made him a celebrity. About this time his plan for The Human Comedy, a great structure of fiction that would embody the social life of his period, began to take shape. The Shagreen Skin in 1831 was followed, during the period of 1832 to 1836, by more than twenty works, including Louis Lambert, The Country Doctor, Eugénie Grandet, and Père Goriot—the latter two among his masterpieces. An affair with the Marquise de Castries gave him access to the upper levels of French society. For the rest of the 1830’s and into the 1840’s, his tremendous production rolled on in such works as Lost Illusions, César Birotteau, The Village Curé, Béatrix, Droll Stories, and Modeste Mignon. He traveled in Italy and cultivated the society of the Countess Guidoboni-Visconti, an Englishwoman. As president of the Society of Men of Letters, he was active in promoting the rights of authors. In 1833 he had first met the Polish Countess Éveline Hanska. He courted her for nearly twenty years. Splendors and Miseries of the Courtesans, Cousin Bette, and Cousin Pons belong among his later works. He wrote about a hundred books. It is estimated that what he had finished of The Human Comedy includes about three thousand characters. His health was declining, but he made several trips to Poland. He married Madame Hanska at Berdichev in March, 1850. They returned to Paris, where Balzac died on August 18th of the same year. A Passion in the Desert was published in 1837, in the same year as César Birotteau and the first part of Lost Illusions. We observe first that it is a story within a story. Why did the author choose this form? One reason, we may guess, is that in the first scene at M. Martin’s menagerie Balzac wishes to remind us that what are called “the big cats” in the circus can be gentled and trained. Thus the soldier’s adventure in the desert will appear less unlikely. Another reason, and perhaps the chief one, is that Balzac evidently preferred not to limit himself to the old soldier’s matter-of-fact expression. So he gives us a worldly narrator who is capable of suggesting all the emotional and “philosophic” niceties of the situation. Moreover, since this is a story about love, the narrator’s woman friend becomes his expert and skeptical audience. Like other stories of Balzac’s, this one seems now and then to be poised on the margin between reality and fable. We feel this, for example, in the incident in which the leopard (“panther” is a more general term) drags the soldier out of the quicksand. It reminds us of Pliny the Elder’s term for leopards—“spotted ladies”—and his remark that only the lion “shows mercy to suppliants.” Clearly we are in the region of fable. But how often do we feel this in Balzac’s story? Hardly at all. This is his first triumph: that he makes us believe the events in the story could happen. He begins by giving us an example of the soldier’s cool resolution in his escape from the Arab camp. The soldier will need all of it that first night in the cave when he wakes up in the dark and hears “a respiration whose savage energy could not belong to a human creature.” Already this Napoleonic soldier, this trooper (he wears spurs) from Provence, has endured the excitement of escape, the despair of finding himself alone in the desert, and the joy of discovering date palms loaded with fruit. Now he faces raw terror as the moon gradually reveals a panther sleeping in the mouth of his cave. It is unlikely, again. She would have scented him, we think. Perhaps she would have waked him as she prowled back and forth in front of the cave. But again, we are willing to believe it. The trooper has a loaded rifle, a scimitar, a dagger. But he does not try to kill her. We believe in his prudence and his forbearance—so French, so intrepid in the Napoleonic style. He is cool enough to observe that she has blood on her muzzle. She will not be hungry again for a while. So begins what is perhaps the strangest love story in all fiction. He is charmed by her feminine power, her suppleness and grace. He woos her. She responds with the languorous affection of a great house cat. He is reminded of his first sweetheart, Virginie, and of how he was always a little afraid of the knife she threatened him with. He too keeps his dagger in hand. But gradually, though he does not give up hope of rescue, he feels in himself a great change of heart. The desert becomes a magic dwelling place. He discovers “in the rising and setting of the sun sights unknown to the world.” For a moment—but only for a moment—the Peaceable Kingdom is at hand.