Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne Nathaniel Hawthorne (he added a w to the family name of Hathorne) was born in Salem, Massachusetts, on July 4, 1804. His father was a shipmaster, and one of his ancestors had been a judge in the Salem witch trials. Young Hawthorne was graduated from Bowdoin College in 1825. He went back to Salem to learn how to write. Two years later he paid for the printing of his first novel, Fanshawe, but burned all the copies he could find. His stories began to appear in many periodicals. In 1837 he published a first edition of Twice-Told Tales and enlarged it in 1842. He worked in the Boston Customhouse. For about six months in 1841, he was a founding member of Brook Farm, a Utopian community near Boston. Out of this experience came a novel, The Blithedale Ro mance, written eleven years later. In 1842 Hawthorne married Sophia Peabody of Salem. They settled in the Old Manse in Concord, where Emerson and Thoreau often came to visit. Their life in the gray seventeenth-century house was commemorated in an essay, The Old Manse, and in Mosses from an Old Manse, a collection of stories published in 1846. In 1845, when he could not pay the rent, Hawthorne moved to his mother’s house in Salem. The following year he was given a political appointment in the Salem Customhouse. Three years later he was dropped when the Whigs returned to power. At first he tried to fight his dismissal. Then, in grim anger, he sat down to write his best-known work, The Scarlet Letter, which appeared in 1850. At long last he was famous. In the following year he produced The House of the Seven Gables and The Snow-Image and Other Twice-Told Tales; in 1852 The Blithedale Romance, A Wonder-Book for Boys and Girls, and a campaign biography of Franklin Pierce, his schoolmate at Bowdoin. In 1853 came Tangle wood Tales for Girls and Boys. During this period he lived for a while at Lenox in western Massachusetts. In nearby Pittsfield, Herman Melville was writing Moby Dick. They became mutually admiring friends. Hawthorne bought “The Wayside” house at Concord in 1852. The following year President Pierce appointed him American consul at Liverpool. He served four years there, spent most of 1858 to 1859 in Rome and Florence, and returned to England to write The Marble Faun. Back in Concord by the middle of 1860, his health “rapidly and mysteriously” worsened. In 1862 he visited the Civil War battlefields and wrote an article that contains a striking picture of Lincoln. On a trip with ex-President Pierce, he died at Plymouth, New Hampshire, on May 19, 1864. Hawthorne, as Newton Arvin writes, felt “a cloudy and obfuscating sense of guilt at the heart of all human relations….” It is perhaps the most profound thing that can be said about him, as man or writer. The testimony comes to us in a hundred voices. Henry James, Sr. said that Hawthorne had “the look all the time…of a rogue who suddenly finds himself in a company of detectives.” Hawthorne himself was well aware of this quality. He once remarked, putting it lightly, that he was a “lover of the moral picturesque.” How can we help but find him one of the most puzzling of nineteenth-century writers? We hardly need to be told that Pilgrim’s Progress was a favorite of his. In certain ways he seems more a man of Bunyan’s century than of Balzac’s. Few of his stories remain plausible under any sort of hard scrutiny. They are “romance” and claim the privileges of romance. But they are moral “romance.” Like an eighteenth-century writer, he states or implies a moral judgment on each of his characters. Who could guess that he was Flaubert’s contemporary? And even on his home ground, New England history, we get the sense that he is often uninformed, confused, or prejudiced. Why then do we read him? Because he is a powerful writer who can build a story stone by stone to its full height. Because he was perhaps the greatest historian of the Puritan conscience in America. He knew it in its darkest depth, in its involvement with every other human feeling. He came to it at that point in time when it was most in conflict with itself, when it was reaching out toward a larger and more humane life. He endured that conflict in himself and wrote it out of himself. In him, as in Melville, the sense of sin and guilt was still powerful. Like Melville, he said no to American free will, to Emerson’s optimism and his call to the self. Rappaccini’s Daughter, like The Marble Faun, may be said to have come out of his two-year sojourn in Italy. But in it the “sunny Italy” of the ballads turns “desolate” and “gloomy.” Perhaps it resembles the real Italy as little as the setting of some of his other tales resembles the New England of his own time. We cannot help but feel that all his stories take place in the Country of Hawthorne, an allegorical region as unmapped as Erewhon or Bluebeard’s domain. Through it runs the dark River of Predestination, and the Mountains of Evil are never far off. As we read Rappaccini’s Daughter, we catch ourselves asking questions. How does Giovanni, alone among unpoisonous things, escape death in Rappaccini’s garden? Why is the innocent and vital Beatrice made the carrier of evil and guilt? Is this meant to suggest the old Christian association between woman and sexual “evil”? Why are we—and Giovanni—not warned that Dr. Baglioni’s antidote may not have the effect he intended? But we concede the author’s freedom in his fable and pass on to the allegory. It stands out bold and plain: the scientist who puts himself beyond good and evil may also put himself outside the human community and work great evil in his pride of power.