Author: John Galsworthy John Galsworthy was born at Coombe, Surrey, on August 14, 1867. He attended Harrow and New College, Oxford. He was enrolled as a barrister but turned to literature. In 1892–93, he was a passenger aboard the ship Torrens, whose ports included London and Adelaide in Australia. Joseph Conrad was her chief mate. They became close friends. Years later, Conrad’s second son was born in Galsworthy’s house in London. His first two novels were not much noticed, but The Man of Property, published in 1906, established his reputation. It was the first novel in a series to be called The Forsyte Saga, his major work. This embraced The Indian Summer of a Forsyte in 1918, In Chan cery, Awakening, and the final To Let in 1921. The Forsyte Saga made Galsworthy the chief historian of manners for the British upper middle class during Victoria’s last years and the reign of Edward VII. Almost from the beginning, he had another string to his bow. He wrote for the stage. His plays became a staple of the English theater in his lifetime. Beginning with The Silver Box in 1906, he touched on social problems in such dramas as Strife in 1909 and Justice in the following year. These were followed by The Pigeon, The Eldest Son, The Fugitive, The Skin Game, and in 1922 his best-known later work for the theater, Loyalties. But he did not neglect the novel. In 1924 The White Monkey, a famous best seller of that year, became the first work in a new trilogy, A Modern Comedy. It was rounded out with The Silver Spoon in 1926 and Swan Song in 1928. His later works included On Forsyte ’Change, Maid in Waiting, and Flowering Wilderness. In 1925 his short stories were collected in Caravan. He was awarded the Order of Merit in 1929 and the Nobel Prize for literature in 1932. He died on January 31, 1933. The Apple-Tree is a story of first love, an idyl of the English countryside at that moment in spring when all the orchard trees turn white under the moon. It is the story of a young man hesitating between two girls. Is there an older and simpler story? We can imagine it happening under the first Pharaoh. Yet The Apple-Tree is more than a simple tale of love. It is also the story of a man in a moral dilemma. Frank Ashurst, the central character, and a member of the English upper class, must choose between Stella—a young girl whose background is very similar to his own and with whom he feels very much at ease, and Megan—a simple, passionate country girl with whom, for the moment, he is deeply in love. He has been stirred to the very depths of his soul—as the phrase goes—by his love for Megan, and he knows that she, too, feels an intense passion for him. The choice would appear to be an easy one: Megan. But Ashurst fears—rather, he knows—that his love for Megan cannot last. Eventually he must return to the city, and her charm would be lost there. Thus he is faced with one of those terrible dilemmas that we have all encountered and will encounter again: he must choose between two evils. If he returns to Megan, he will be encouraging a love which can endure only for a moment; if he does not return to her, he will be abandoning her at the moment when her hopes are highest. Is Ashurst’s dilemma a genuine one? Is he really concerned about Megan, or is he a snob who has suddenly realized that he has come close to marrying a girl beneath his class? If he is a snob, is he consciously so, or is he an unwitting victim of the class system? Each reader of The Apple-Tree will probably answer these questions in a different way. Was an enduring love between Ashurst and Megan really impossible? Freud thought so, but he did not find fault with either of the lovers. He placed the blame on civilization itself. In commenting on the story, he said, “It shows in a very moving and forcible way how there is no longer any place in present-day civilized life for a simple natural love between two human beings.” Was Freud right? If he was, why does civilization make such love impossible? Perhaps because it endangers civilization. Such love overturns all barriers, it breaks down all walls, it upsets all arrangements. Civilization cannot exist without barriers, walls, and arrangements. And civilization is a valuable thing—more valuable than love.