Author: Albert Einstein and Leopold Infeld Albert Einstein was born at Ulm, Germany, in 1879. In 1896 he entered the Swiss Federal Polytechnic School at Zürich; but bored by the teaching, he found time to read the works of the great physicists of the nineteenth century. Receiving his degree in 1900, he searched in vain for a teaching post. He finally took a job in the Berne patent office. Again he found himself with free time, which he used for further reading and thinking. In 1905, when he was twenty-six, he published four papers, each of which contained a great discovery in physics, and which had the effect of creating three new branches of physics: relativity, statistical mechanics, and the quantum theory of radiation. In 1909 Einstein was made professor of physics at the University of Zürich, where he had received his Ph.D. in 1905. He continued to work on relativity, the special theory of which had constituted one of his papers of 1905; and in 1916 he published his famous paper on the general theory of relativity. He received the Nobel Prize in physics for 1921. After 1920 Einstein to some extent parted company from the main development of modern physics. Its dependence on probability concerned him, for this seemed to indicate that its laws were only provisional. He asserted that an over-all reduction of all physical laws to geometry would be the test of a true theory. He believed that he had made such a reduction before his death, but most physicists do not as yet agree that his final formulation adequately explains the observed phenomena. To escape the anti-Jewish persecutions of Hitler’s Germany, and in order to continue his researches in freedom, Einstein left Europe for the United States in 1933. He joined the Institute for Advanced Study, in Princeton, New Jersey, and remained there for the rest of his life. In 1939 it became known to him that two German physicists had brought about the fission of uranium. He was asked to inform the American government of the possible results of this achievement, and he did so, in a letter to President Roosevelt. As a consequence, the Manhattan Project was instituted, which built the atomic bomb. There was a profound irony in this, for Einstein was always a sincere pacifist and humanitarian. He died at Princeton in 1955. Leopold Infeld was born at Crakow, Poland, in 1898. He studied at Lwów and Crakow, receiving his Ph.D. from the latter’s university in 1921. He went to England and then to America, where he joined the Institute for Advanced Study, 1936–38. He was professor of applied mathematics at the University of Toronto from 1939–50, after which he returned to Poland. He was associated with the University of Warsaw until his death on January 16, 1968. He made contributions to the theory of relativity and to quantum theory, and he wrote several books of a popular nature. It was at the Institute for Advanced Study that he and Einstein planned and wrote The Evolution of Physics (1938), from which the following selection is taken. Scientific concepts often begin with those used in ordinary language for the affairs of everyday life,” say the authors, “but they develop quite differently. They are transformed and lose the ambiguity associated with them in ordinary language, gaining in rigorousness so that they may be applied to scientific thought.” They go on to explain that the special language of science is mathematics. “Mathematics as a tool of reasoning,” they write, “is necessary if we wish to draw conclusions which may be compared with experiment.” And they point out that “the price which must be paid for abandoning the language of mathematics is a loss in precision, and the neces- sity of sometimes quoting results without showing how they were reached.” However, the authors are willing to pay the price. The reader will notice that in this long selection—indeed, in the entire book from which it is taken—there is not a single mathematical formula. This discussion of classical physical theory and its transformation into modern physics is written in a language other than the special language that made the transformation possible and necessary. That revolutionary changes in scientific theory are necessary, and indeed inevitable, is a point emphasized by the authors. “Physical concepts are free creations of the human mind,” they say, “and are not, however it may seem, uniquely determined by the external world.” They compare the scientist to a man “trying to understand the mechanism of a closed watch.” He can never open the watch; he can only form a picture of a mechanism that would explain what he sees happening on the face of the watch. “He will never be able to compare his picture with the real mechanism…. But he certainly believes that, as his knowledge increases, his picture of reality will become simpler and simpler and will explain a wider and wider range of his sensuous impressions.” This idea is an extremely important one for modern science. Successive theories only approximate the “objective truth,” they can never reach it. Indeed, its existence may be denied. The criteria by which one theory is preferred to another would still remain the same. They are, as Einstein and Infeld point out, simplicity and comprehensibility. The authors indicate why it is that “there are no eternal theories in science.” They write: “It always happens that some of the facts predicted by a theory are disproved by experiment. Every theory has its period of gradual development and triumph, after which it may experience a rapid decline…. Nearly every great advance in science arises from a crisis in the old theory, through an endeavor to find a way out of the difficulties created. We must examine old ideas, old theories, although they belong to the past, for this is the only way to understand the importance of the new ones and the extent of their validity.” This, too, is an important point. And it applies not only in science. In philosophy, in history, in law, and in medicine, it is equally essential, for an adequate understanding of the present, to understand the past. It is often said that the unwillingness of modern education to recognize this principle is one of its most striking failures. The following selection from The Evolution of Physics is a remarkable piece of writing. It treats of difficult ideas with the utmost simplicity; it makes plain what would otherwise be dark. Its discussion, for example, of the change from the substance theory of heat to the mechanical theory of heat is a model of clarity. It is particularly useful for the reader of this volume, for it reviews the history of physics from Galileo and Newton to Einstein himself. That is a period in which most of the essays and lectures reprinted here were first published. Besides being illuminating in itself, it can thus serve as background reading for many of them. The selection is most valuable of all, perhaps, for the questions it raises. Indeed, it suggests that asking questions is of primary importance. “The formulation of a problem,” the authors say, “is often more essential than its solution, which may be merely a matter of mathematical or experimental skill.”