Author: John Stuart Mill First son of the Scottish philosopher James Mill, John Stuart Mill was born in London, May 20, 1806. The elder Mill, prompted by the schemes of Bentham and Helvétius, took his son’s education in hand (see below). At three, young Mill was put to learning Greek. By the time he was thirteen, he had done more than enough work to earn a university degree. After a year in France, where he branched out into chemistry, botany, advanced mathematics, and the French language, he read law and studied Condillac, Helvétius, and Dumont’s treatise on Bentham. This led to writing for the newspapers and to the founding of the Utilitarian Society, dedicated to “the greatest good of the greatest number.” When young Mill was seventeen, his father got him a job with the India House, where he himself worked. From 1836, the year his father died, to 1856, J.S.Mill administered the company’s relations with the native Indian states. His real career—as philosopher, political economist, logician, ethical theorist, and promoter of ideas—went on outside office hours. He became the leader of social reform. His name appeared in every review. Wherever social neglect or abuse could be found, Mill attacked at once. His group played a strong hand in the English reform bills all through the century. His energy was prodigious. In one decade, the 1840’s, among other books, Mill published his Prin ciples of Political Economy and System of Logic, both two-volume works. In 1851 he married Mrs. Harriet Taylor, his friend for twenty years. She died some seven years later. On the Subjection of Women expressed their common view. Mill retired to a villa near Avignon, France, where she was buried. Except for one term in Parliament, he spent most of his later years there. During that period he wrote the famous On Liberty, Considerations on Representative Govern ment, and the Autobiography, published after his death. He died in Avignon, May 8, 1873. Our Me,” Carlyle wrote, “the only reality.” His friend Mill would not have agreed with him. Mill’s Autobiography is only in small part the story of a man. It stands largely as the history of a “continued mental progress,” of the branching and flowering of ideas, and of what fruit they bore in the world. The first three chapters of the Autobiography are reprinted here. In these chapters Mill looks back on his education. Not his childhood. He had no childhood in the ordinary sense—or at least he tells us of none. Augustine’s Confessions is much occupied with his mother; Mill does not even mention his. He had no school, no playmates—or even play. The younger children in the family were his pupils. In the forefront of the book looms the gigantic presence of his father. Young Mill lived solely in his light, as eldest son, pupil, apprentice, and disciple. They worked at the same table, took the same walks together, and discussed the same ideas. But their relationship was moral and intellectual, not affectionate. By the time he was eight, young Mill had learned arithmetic and read, in the Greek, Aesop’s Fables, Herodotus, Xenophon’s Anabasis, six dialogues of Plato, and other works. “But my father,” he writes, “in all his teaching, demanded of me not only the utmost that I could do, but much that I could by no possibility have done.” At the same time he was reading and reporting on dozens of histories: Hume, Gibbon, Plutarch, even the Annual Register, a year-by-year chronicle of events, founded by Edmund Burke. Then he took up Latin, Euclid, and algebra, and at twelve began a rigorous term of scholastic logic, plus Aristotle. Small wonder, then, that at the age of twenty Mill had a nervous crisis. This was not so much what we should call a breakdown as a breaking away—from the domination of his father, of the intellect itself. He discovered that he liked poetry, the poetry of Wordsworth in particular. The whole life of feeling opened to him. He became what he had never been trained to be: a whole man. His education might well have produced a neurotic, a monster, or a mere “intellectual machine set to grind certain tunes.” Instead, by some miracle of recovered balance, it helped to produce one of the most brilliant men of his generation.