Author: Galileo Galilei Galileo was born at Pisa, Italy, in 1564, the son of a musician. At a monastery near Florence he received his early education. In 1581, at his father’s request, young Galileo began to study medicine at the University of Pisa, but when his passion for mathematics declared itself, he was allowed to follow his own scientific bent. In his first year at the university, he checked the time of the swings of a lamp by his pulse beats, noting that the time was always the same, whatever the amplitude of the swing. He had discovered the isochronism of the pendulum. When poverty obliged him to withdraw from the university in 1585, he gave lectures and published an account of his invention of the hydrostatic balance. In 1589 he was made mathematical lecturer at the University of Pisa and spent the following two years conducting experiments on falling bodies, which laid the foundations for modern physical science. His results, directly contrary to the doctrine of Aristotle, angered the Aristotelian members of the faculty, and in 1591 he resigned to take the chair of mathematics at Padua. There he taught for eighteen years, established a European reputation as a scientist, and attracted many students. In 1609, hearing that magnifying glasses were being made in Holland, he built his first telescope. Under this sudden magnification, which was gradually increased to thirty times, thousands of unknown stars were revealed in the Milky Way, and the huge moon and planets became new worlds to conquer. He described his discoveries in the Starry Messenger (1610), from which the following selection is taken. Although Galileo had long since accepted the Copernican hypothesis, he prudently continued to teach the old Ptolemaic system during his whole stay at Padua. By 1610, however, having just discovered the four satellites of Jupiter, and while regaling in the plaudits of scientists all over Europe, he at last took the bold step of announcing his belief in the Copernican theory. For a time all went well. He even received a lucrative post as court mathematician at Florence, under the Medicis. Galileo demonstrated the telescope with great success to the ecclesiastical authorities at Rome. But his assertion that the Copernican hypothesis could be reconciled with Scripture brought him into conflict with the theologians. In defense of his position, he quoted the remark of Cardinal Baronius that the “Holy Spirit intended to teach us in the Bible how to go to Heaven, not how the heavens go.” In 1615 he was warned by Maffeo Barberini (later Pope Urban VIII) not to defend or even to hold the heretical doctrine that the earth moves around the sun, and he agreed to keep silent on the subject henceforth. He kept his word up to 1632, when his Dialogue of the Two Principal Systems of the World appeared. In this beautifully written dialogue, one speaker defends the Ptolemaic system, whereas the other two uphold the Copernican conception, but in very different ways. One is bold and imaginative, the other cautious—unwilling to go beyond the evidence. Galileo did not identify himself with any of the three characters, but it was clear that his sympathies were divided between the two Copernicans. There were two immediate developments. The book was a dazzling success and admired throughout Europe. Secondly, Galileo was summoned to Rome by the Inquisition. After a trial, he was forced to forswear on his knees “the false doctrine” that the earth moves around the sun and is not the center of the universe. He was placed under house arrest, in which relatively comfortable state he remained for the rest of his life. His real punishment was the compulsion to disavow a profound conviction that his own discoveries had gone far to confirm. In December, 1633, he was permitted to return to Florence and live in his villa. There he completed his Dialogues Concerning the Two New Sciences (1638), which treated of the physical investigations he had begun in his youth. He became blind in 1637 but continued to work on various problems in physics. He died on January 8, 1642, and was buried in the church of Santa Croce, in Florence. Isaac Newton was born on December 25 the same year. Ancient peoples—the Indians, Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans—had followed the movements and patterns of the stars with passionate attention. The stars were the abode of the gods and the source of hope. They had guided travelers on sea and land, and the meaning of life and particular destinies had been seen in their constellations and conjunctions. Imagine the sensation caused by the first telescope, which suddenly transformed this immemorial steadfast sky, showing innumerable new stars, revealing satellites revolving about the familiar planets, and the moon scarred by rugged mountain chains and desolate valleys. The heavenly bodies could no longer be regarded as perfect and immutable. Old religions and long revered philosophical doctrines tottered at the spectacle. Prior to Galileo and his telescope, the Copernican theory, in spite of its beautiful mathematical simplicity, was at a disadvantage. The followers of the old Ptolemaic system could point out that everyone sees the sun rise in the morning and set in the evening. Can we not trust our senses? Moreover, the world does appear to be the center of the universe. On all sides we see equal spaces. Copernican thinkers could reply that if space is infinite it has no center, and that if it is vast enough, any place you stand in will appear to be the center of the universe and will seem to be stationary, while the rest of creation moves. Space and motion are relative. If we take the sun to be the center, however, the scheme of the universe becomes far more economical and comprehensible. But so far there was no empirical support for the heliocentric system. Galileo’s telescopic discoveries began to turn the tide. His discovery that Jupiter has four satellites (the number has now been increased to twelve), which revolve about that planet, could be taken as a model of what goes on in the heavens. If these four satellites revolve about Jupiter, why may not Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Mars, the Earth, Venus, and Mercury revolve about the sun? Would not Galileo’s conclusions about the moon, and the shifting of light and shadow on its rugged surface, also favor the Copernican hypothesis? Galileo’s law of falling bodies, the reader will want to keep in mind, furnished in the end the strongest kind of support for the Copernican view, and for Kepler’s system of elliptical planetary orbits, which was being evolved at the same time. The idea that the motion of bodies depends on their qualitative nature had been a serious handicap for centuries. Galileo’s demonstration that the acceleration of falling bodies depends alone upon the time of fall led the way to Newton’s laws of motion—to the modern science of mechanics, including celestial mechanics. The larger spots on the moon had long been recognized. It was the smaller ones which Galileo discovered, and his measurement of these are renowned for their accuracy. They persuaded him that “the surface of the moon is not smooth, uniform and precisely spherical as a great number of philosophers believe it (and the other heavenly bodies) to be, but is uneven, rough, and full of cavities and prominences, being not unlike the face of the earth….” The evidence offered for this conclusion is a model of careful induction and lucid exposition and takes on added interest today, when close-up lunar photographs have been taken and there is a near prospect of putting men on the moon. The analogy drawn between the moon and the earth is of great assistance in understanding our “fickle” companion, but it can occasionally mislead. We find Galileo arguing, for example, that the reason we do not see the high mountains of the moon at its periphery may be that our line of vision here passes through a greater thickness of lunar atmosphere (see the diagram on p. 340). But why assume that the moon has an atmosphere? We know today that it has none. Galileo did not need this explanation, for he had just offered another: we may fail to see the peaks at the periphery, just as we fail to see the separate peaks of a mountain chain on earth, when we look at it from a distance. Galileo’s rapid account of his observations and deductions is flushed by the excitement of new and portentous discovery. The moon and Jupiter—the largest planet—are fascinating in themselves, but the Starry Messenger is also one of the finest examples of the scientific method in action.