Author: Benjamin Franklin Benjamin Franklin—workman, printer, inventor, scientist, philosopher, and statesman—was the fifteenth child of a New England soap- and candlemaker. He was born in Boston in 1706, and attended school there till the age of ten. In Philadelphia, at seventeen, he had learned the printer’s trade, and had started his career as an author in the New England Courant. With a promise of help from Governor Keith of Pennsylvania, he sailed for England in 1724, to get equipment to set up a printing firm of his own. The promise proved hollow, however, and he returned to Philadelphia two years later a wiser man. Then the remarkable success story began. In 1730 Franklin was owner of his own printing shop and publisher of the Pennsylvania Gazette, and had become an author. In Poor Richard’s Almanack, which he published from the early 1730’s through 1757, he drew an unforgettable picture of Yankee commonsense, shrewdness, thrift, and enterprise. His pithy sayings epitomized, and helped to shape, the new American. So successful were Franklin’s printing operations that he was able to retire from business at forty-two, and to devote himself to science. Although engrossed in many enterprises, Franklin had somehow found time to study literature, history, technological problems, science, and foreign languages. His self-taught genius was eventually acknowledged by scholars and scientists in many countries. His most spectacular achievement was his demonstration—by way of a kite sailed in a thunderstorm—that lightning is electricity. His most lasting achievement may have been the founding of the American Philosophical Society in 1743, and the Academy of Philadelphia in 1751. Franklin also found time to hold various public offices. He was post-master general for the northern colonies (1753–74), a delegate to the Albany Congress (1754), and twenty years later he was made president of the Pennsylvania Executive Council. On several important diplomatic missions to England and to France, his shrewdness, wit, amiability, and scientific reputation made a strong impression, and difficult negotiations prospered. He had sought a compromise with England, but when he saw this was impossible, he threw all his weight behind the Revolution. He died at the age of eighty-four, full of honor—a highly original American, but also a very typical one. In 1743 Franklin proposed the establishment of a Philosophical Society. He had observed the lack of communication in what he called “a long tract of continent.” Reading newspapers from other colonies, he became aware of intellectual interests scattered over a wide area. It was obvious that some regular means of exchanging ideas was needed. The model for the proposed Philosophical Society was The Royal Society of London, which had been founded in 1660. Franklin knew what a great part The Royal Society had played in advancing science in England, and hoped for similar developments, though on a smaller scale, in the New World. Like The Royal Society, Franklin’s Philosophical Society was to combine technology with pure science, was to promote shipping, industry, and agriculture, as well as mathematics, physics, chemistry, and the biological sciences. He believed that science and technology were interdependent, and that the one would fructify the other. As science advanced, the colonies would be strengthened economically. Life would be made far easier and richer by laborsaving machinery and improvements in agriculture. Men might be transported from place to place with great rapidity, he said—sustained in the air. In short, Franklin had great hopes for technology, and they have been fully confirmed. As early as 1743, Franklin proposed the founding of an educational institution—an Academy—in Philadelphia, and he projected it in a pamphlet which he himself printed in 1749. The school opened under his sponsorship in 1751. It is well to remember that Pennsylvania had few schools at the time of Franklin; the teachers were poorly prepared and even more poorly paid. A few children of the wealthy were educated by tutors, but the rest had few opportunities. It was typical of Franklin’s practical turn of mind and also of his sincerity that he not only proposed the establishment of the Academy but also took a keen interest in the financial arrangements which would alone make it possible. Separating well-to-do citizens from their money for educational purposes was something new and painful. Yet Franklin’s efforts were successful. The school weathered financial drought and eventually became the University of Pennsylvania. Franklin’s ideas on education were a combination of old and new, and forecast the kind of education which was to prevail in the United States. He proposed that the students learn “those things that are likely to be most useful and most ornamental.” The emphasis on the useful was new, and so was the provision for exercise and sports to promote health. The recommendation that the masters “look on the students as in some sort their children” and “treat them with familiarity and affection” was novel and humane. Franklin’s central idea was that learning and learning alone confers “benignity of mind” and “an ability to serve mankind, one’s country, friends, and family.” This ideal is worth comparing with the aims of education as expressed by other writers included in this set—Swift, Bacon, Schopenhauer, Dewey, and Faraday.