Author: Tobias Dantzig Tobias Dantzig was born in Russia in 1884. As a young man he studied in Paris under several great French mathematicians, among them Henri Poincaré. At an early age he decided that mathematics should be acquired by study of the works of the masters. This conviction led him to pursue his studies back through the medieval ages to the Greeks and their discoveries in science. Dantzig went to the United States in 1910. After taking his doctorate at the University of Indiana, he taught at Columbia and at the University of Maryland. At various times he served as mathematical consultant for industry. This acquaintance with industrial problems gave him a lifelong interest in the applications of mathematics. After his retirement from university teaching, he continued to write and to give courses in the history of mathematics. He died in 1956. A lover of stories, Dantzig never forgot a tale. This vast reservoir was put to good use in the classroom and in his writings. He was intensely interested in mathematicians as people, and his writings are spiced with colorful anecdotes about famous scientific personalities. Among his works are The Story of Geometry, Aspects of Science, The Bequest of the Greeks, and Number: The Language of Science. The last-named book was praised by Albert Einstein as the best book on the evolution of mathematics that had come into his hands. This work broke a new path. It was the first attempt to bring mathematics to the public in a manner suited to the mathematically untrained. The following two selections are taken from this pioneering effort. They both deal with the evolution of the number concept. Fingerprints shows man at a very early stage in his attempt to gain understanding and power over the world. Whatever is counted is somehow captured, as in a net. When primitive man fashioned this net, its design was almost inevitably determined by the fact that he had ten fingers. Before he had words or written symbols for numbers, he possessed on his own hands the tools for counting. Through the ages the net has become larger and more intricate. It has been cast beyond the world into the universe. But it still carries the imprint of man’s physical make-up. We count by tens. “Has the concept [of number] been born of experience, or has experience merely served to render explicit what was already latent in the primitive mind?” Dantzig asks a question on which there is a long history of speculation. Various and conflicting answers are found in the writings of Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Russell, and James. The Empty Column is the story of how mathematics was stymied for centuries for want of a symbol—our modern zero. Everyday calculations remained in the hands of the experts long after commerce and industry cried out for an arithmetic that could be understood by everyone. Why did this notation come so late? Alfred North Whitehead says: “The point about zero is that we do not need to use it in the operations of daily life. No one goes out to buy zero fish. It is in a way the most civilized of all the cardinals, and its use is only forced on us by the needs of cultivated modes of thought.” To this story of the growth of our modern number system, Dantzig brings a lively sense of the human qualities involved. “It is not a story of brilliant achievement, heroic deeds, or noble sacrifice. It is a story of blind stumbling and chance discovery, of groping in the dark and refusing to admit the light. It is a story replete with obscurantism and prejudice, of sound judgment often eclipsed by loyalty to tradition, and of reason long held subservient to custom. In short, it is a human story.”