Author: Edward Kasner and James R. Newman Edward Kasner, born in New York City in 1878, was educated at the College of the City of New York, and at Columbia and Göttingen Universities. He was on the teaching staff at Columbia from 1900 until his retirement in 1949. In addition, he lectured at the New School for Social Research from 1938 until 1951. He died in 1955. Kasner’s specialty was higher geometry. On this subject he wrote Geometry upon a Quadric Surface, The Problems of Geometry, and Differential Geometric Aspects of Dynamics. He also wrote Einstein’s Theory of Gravitation. (He was called “one of the twelve men who understood Einstein.”) Interested in the simplification of mathematical terminology, Kasner introduced such phrases and words as snowflake curve, anti-snowflake curve, googol, and googolplex. Kasner was widely known for his skill as a teacher. His humor, fertile imagination, and exceptional ability as a lecturer made his courses among the most popular at Columbia. But his audience extended beyond college students; he also liked to give lectures on infinity, topology, and other difficult matters to children of kindergarten age. It was his theory that the way to interest children in mathematics was to begin at the top, and only gradually work down to the elementary concepts. All of his students remembered their instruction under Professor Kasner as an intellectual delight. James Newman, who attended several of Kasner’s courses as a graduate student, attributed his own interest in mathematics to this teacher. James R.Newman was born in 1907 in New York City. He attended Columbia University, graduating from the School of Law. He served with several government agencies and helped write the key bill that placed atomic development under civilian control. A writer as well as a lawyer, Newman was an editor of Scientific American and New Republic. Newman’s interest in mathematics began when he discovered that there was much in the study of philosophy that could not be understood without some mathematical knowledge. He did not regard himself as an original, creative mathematician. His contribution to mathematics has been to serve as guide and interpreter in a too-little traveled land. In 1956 Newman published a four-volume anthology, The World of Mathematics. This work is a collection of writings about mathematics and mathematicians appealing to a wide range of tastes and capacities. It became a best seller. With his teacher Edward Kasner, Newman collaborated on Mathematics and the Imagination, from which the following selections are taken. New Names for Old discusses new words that have been added to mathematical language. New ideas and new ways of looking at old ideas need new forms of expression. Most of these terms are familiar but are given special meaning in mathematical usage. In discussing these special meanings, the authors give a short tour of modern mathematics. Two words for large numbers, googol and googolplex, prepare the reader for a glimpse into the mathematical land that lies beyond intuition and beyond imagination. This is the realm of the infinite. The difference between an immensely large number and infinity is not a quantitative difference, it is qualitative. At infinity, you are not just farther out—you are in a different country. And this country shares no border with your ordinary concept of mathematics. The second piece, Beyond the Googol, makes the leap that carries you beyond all sense experience. It begins by clarifying the idea of counting. This requires a precise definition of number. The everyday understanding of number is not sufficient for the task ahead. You are going to count that which would seem to be uncountable—the infinitely large. The problems of the infinite have always been challenging. They have given rise to such paradoxical notions as “motion is impossible” and “Achilles will never be able to overtake the tortoise.” Aristotle and others failed to dispose of these paradoxes. Has modern mathematics succeeded? The answer is startling. It carries you far beyond your power to imagine. You will need an adventurous spirit. Ignore your “common sense” but hold fast to logic.