Author: Jonathan Swift Jonathan Swift was born in Dublin, of English parents, on November 30, 1667. The generosity of his examiners gave him a degree at Trinity College. He crossed to England and in 1689 became secretary to Sir William Temple at Moor Park. Except for an interval as a clergyman near Belfast, Swift remained at Moor Park until Sir William died in 1699. There Swift became tutor and friend to Esther Johnson, a child who would grow up to be the “Stella” of his Journal to Stella. There, too, he wrote The Battle of the Books and A Tale of a Tub. After Temple’s death, Swift found a clerical post at Laracor, near Dublin. He took a D.D. in 1701. That same year, at Swift’s invitation, Stella and a woman companion settled in Laracor. Swift spent much time in London. He was friendly with Pope, Steele, and Addison. In 1708 he published the “Isaac Bickerstaff” letters, a hoax on a notorious London astrologer. Swift had been a Whig in politics. But when the Whigs fell from office, he became the intimate of the new Tory ministers, Oxford and Bolingbroke. As their principal writer, he got hold of considerable power, which he enjoyed. Queen Anne appointed him Dean of St. Patrick’s, Dublin. He was hardly welcomed when he took office in 1713. A little later the Queen died, and the Tory ministry fell. Swift supported Oxford and even offered to share his imprisonment. Then he retired to his Dublin cathedral. His relations with Stella were complicated by the devotion of Esther Vanhomrigh, the daughter of a Dublin merchant, who appears as the “Vanessa” of his writings. He is said to have spent “a third of his income on charities.” In 1724 his Drapier Letters, an attack on an unjust coinage system, put all Ireland in a rage. Two years later, the anonymous Gulliver’s Travels was published. By 1742 his mental condition was such that guardians were appointed. He died on October 19, 1745, and was buried beside Stella, his “violent friend,” in the crypt of St. Patrick’s. Taine speaks of Swift’s “exaggerated and terrible pride” that “made the haughtiness of the most powerful ministers and most mighty lords bow beneath his arrogance.” It was one aspect of his force of personality. This force was condensed, in all Swift’s work, by the pressure of his necessity to fit human life into an unchanging frame of reason. So we have the massive, rolling onset of his prose. Its clarity, exactness, and power make it a fit instrument for its purpose. It has great social leverage. We think of Swift as the greatest satirist in English. One of the signs of a good writer is that we can intersect his work at many angles. We can find more than one level of meaning in it. This is true even in such a simple case as Swift’s Resolutions when I Come to Be Old. On the surface, it is just what the title suggests: a man writing a memorandum to himself in the form of a list of axioms intended to govern a wise old age. Would they, in fact, do that? We are inclined to think that they might, at least in the social sense. Then we notice that all but one of the axioms begin with not. The exception is a check on the rest. The author is laying down acts and types of behavior to be avoided, not things to be done. Ricardo Quintana points out that the situations mentioned are “the stock ones of social comedy.” But is it not possible that Swift and the authors of the social comedies had both observed the same types of behavior in a more or less standardized society? And is it not true that Swift here catches certain traits of old men in any civilized society? In An Essay on Modern Education, we observe once more that Swift is concerned, not with the needs or wishes of the individual, but with those of an aristocratic society which he must be taught to serve. As an old friend of the philosopher George Berkeley and his wife, Swift was often persuaded to read to Mrs. Berkeley from her favorite book, Robert Boyle’s Meditations. He wrote a parody, A Meditation upon a Broomstick, and read it out to her as if it were one of Boyle’s. Only Swift could have conceived the broomstick as a comic symbol of man and then stood it on its head. Swift, Berkeley, and Edmund Burke were all outraged by the British misgovernment of Ireland in the eighteenth century. A Modest Proposal is one fruit of that outrage. We are told that there are tens of thousands of unwanted babies in Ireland. They cannot be provided for. Very well, says Swift. Let us sell them and eat them. The argument is faultless and masterly. It is delivered in the enlightened tone of a man who proposes a new kind of stock-raising for the benefit of the country. There is nothing at all wrong with it except that it is inhuman. But is it more inhuman than allowing these same children to starve to death? Irony, satire, humor, reason gone mad—Swift brings all these to bear on a problem that still troubles the human race.