Author: Pliny the Younger Pliny the Younger (Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus) was born in a.d. 61 or 62 in Novum Comum, now the Como region of Italy. He was a member of a distinguished Roman family. His mother was Plinia, sister of Pliny the Elder; the latter adopted the boy in his will, thus making him his heir. Pliny the Younger inherited all the possessions of his famous and affluent uncle, including his valuable library, and including also his name. The young man was educated in rhetoric under the celebrated Quintilian and had also as his guardian L.Verginius Rufus, who three times declined to become emperor. Thus, when at eighteen Pliny began his career as an advocate, he did so under the most favorable auspices. He held various and important public offices. He was a tribune of the plebs, or representative of the people in the Senate, a commissioner of the military treasury; and in the year 100, he was appointed a consul by the emperor Trajan. Tacitus and possibly Plutarch were also honored in this way by Trajan. In 111, Pliny was made Governor of Bithynia. There it is supposed that he remained until his death, which probably occurred in 113. His extant works consist of a panegyric on Trajan, delivered at the time of Pliny’s elevation to the consulship, and ten volumes of published letters. The tenth of these comprises correspondence with Trajan on administrative matters in Bithynia. Several of the letters are of particular interest, for they contain some of the first descriptions of early Christian ritual and practice. The younger Pliny was a friend of the historian Tacitus, and many of his published letters were addressed to him. There is no date on the two letters to Tacitus that are reprinted below. The events which they relate occurred in a.d. 79, when Pliny was eighteen, but the letters were not published until nearly thirty years had passed. It is thus not known when they were written. Nevertheless, they sound as if they were written while Pliny’s memory was fresh. It is possible that they were rewritten long after the event from first drafts or notes. In any event, Tacitus had asked Pliny to describe the circumstances of the death of his famous uncle, and the letters do so. The fact that this death occurred as a result of the eruption of Vesuvius gives us an eyewitness account of that famous and terrible disaster. The first letter has a solemn tone, as if the author knew that it would be preserved for the record. The eruption of Vesuvius which destroyed Pompeii and Herculaneum appears in it only as the rather remote background that gives emphasis to the stoic nobility of the elder Pliny’s death. The latter was an important public official as well as a celebrated writer, and his nephew treats him here accordingly. In the second letter, however, Pliny the Younger’s youthfulness emerges. Imitating his uncle’s stoicism, he reads Livy under a shower of ashes; and, refusing to flee, strikes what appear to be self-consciously noble attitudes. Nevertheless, he frankly admits his fear. The Stoics and Epicureans held that the world would end in fire. The young Pliny confesses that he believed that the final day had come. Both of Pliny’s letters are self-conscious and a little self-complacent, too. He has been criticized for this; he never wrote with the freedom and naturalness of, for example, Cicero. He always seemed to have one eye on posterity; and, even in the second letter, his protests that his personal experiences are of no importance have a hollow ring. Nevertheless, the qualities emerge that have made Pliny readable throughout the ages, and that may have helped his letters to survive. There are touches of vainglory that may make us laugh, but at the same time the letters are so modern that we can almost conceive of Pliny as a young college friend writing about a modern disaster. We have read of the last days of Pompeii in our history books, and some may have visited its excavated ruins. But nothing makes that historic tragedy more real than this clear and vivid account of it by a boy, still shaken by fright.