Author: Ralph Waldo Emerson Descended from a line of Massachusetts clergymen, Ralph Waldo Emerson was born in Boston, May 25, 1803. His father, a Unitarian minister, died when he was a small boy. All but penniless, Emerson finished Harvard with honors at eighteen, taught and preached his way through divinity school, and in 1829 was ordained minister of the Second Church in Boston. A little later he married Ellen Tucker. When she died in 1831, he was already known as a preacher second only to the famous William Ellery Channing. This was his point of crisis. He left the ministry and set up shop as lay preacher to America and the world. He wanted new ideas, new men, a new age. In England he visited Wordsworth and Coleridge, and became a lifelong friend of Carlyle. Settled in Concord and married again, he lived by lecturing and published an anonymous first book, Nature, in 1836. In it most of his chief ideas were laid out for use. His 1837 Harvard address, “The American Scholar,” announced his broad program. This was regarded as “the latest form of infidelity.” He was a rebel, and attracted others. The Transcendentalist movement, derived in part from Coleridge, Carlyle, and the German philosophers, began to be talked about. By 1849, when he had published Repre sentative Men and the first and second series of Essays, Emerson was known in Europe and already accepted as a great figure in his own country. His reputation was still building when he died, after years of fading health, on April 27, 1882. What now seems to us his best work survives in a few of the poems, his vigorous and solid English Traits, several studies of character, and the Journals. Emerson’s essay on Henry David Thoreau was written after his friend’s death. It is a shrewd and vivid picture, made with fresh colors, and touched here and there with humor. Beyond that, we may find a little comedy of provincial character in it. They had both grown up in poor families (Emerson’s mother was left with six children, and Thoreau’s mother kept a boardinghouse). They were both Massachusetts men and Concord men (one of Emerson’s ancestors had helped found the town and Thoreau was born there). They were both educated at Harvard (Emerson tells us how highhandedly Thoreau treated his old college), both poets and writer-philosophers. “The other world is all my art; my pencils will draw no other,” said Thoreau, echoing Plato’s vision of the ideal. It was perhaps the one basic idea that he shared with Emerson. Beyond that, in their views of the world and universe, they were more often than not widely apart. Each came from one of the sharply marked classes in early New England: Emerson from the ruling professional class and Thoreau from the laboring and farming class. Emerson made a living at lecturing, where Thoreau failed. Surveying and pencil making earned Thoreau what little money he needed. Emerson felt that it was enough to expound his ideas; Thoreau believed that his must be acted out. He could build a boat; it was all Emerson could do to row one. Emerson meant to take the world for his province; Thoreau made his province the world. Like Whitman, Emerson said yes to his time; Thoreau, like Melville, said no. How then could they understand each other? There lies the comedy. It is remarkable how much Emerson did understand. He gives us a clear and affectionate view of Thoreau as the “born protestant,” a man who could be a hedgehog to his neighbors. But how much of this was downright oddity of character, and how much a deliberate acting out of his ideas? He refused to pay taxes to what he considered an unjust government and went to jail for it. (A friend paid the fine without letting him know.) Was this defiant individualism, or was it a truly social act? Did it come out of a sense, higher than most men could boast, of what citizen and government should demand of each other? Emerson does not mention how he tried to take care of the younger man. He “provided the acres” for Thoreau’s experiment at Walden. But he was doubtful. These were the years in which all America seemed to be moving westward. Thoreau, who might have been one of the leaders, was wasted as “the captain of a huckleberry party.” Was it true? Was he, in fact, a potential Audubon and Kit Carson, with a larger grasp than either? Did he need a glimpse of Lake Chad, or even Grand Lake in Colorado, to give him the relative scale of his Walden Pond? Or was he right in believing that if he could live deeply with his own countryside, get his own bass tree and muskrat and dragonfly down on the page, that would be enough for any man’s lifetime? Emerson gives us the means to ask these questions. He does not answer them.