Author: Bertrand Russell Russell began worrying about the foundations of mathematics at the age of eleven. He was studying Euclid at that time and was disappointed to learn that he was expected to accept some things without proof. It seemed a little slipshod to him. He wanted everything proved. He never lost this desire for clarity and certainty; it led him to attempt to establish the logical basis for all mathematics. Bertrand Russell, British philosopher and mathematician, was born at Trelleck, in Monmouthshire, in 1872. Both of his parents died before he was four years old and he was brought up by his grandmother, Countess Russell. A woman of strong religious beliefs, she instilled in Russell the ideas that he must be of service to mankind and that he should always have the courage to follow his own conscience. Russell was profoundly influenced by his grandmother. Although he rejected her religious teachings at an early age, he used his immense talent in humane and liberal causes for over half a century. He publicly and courageously committed himself on many controversial issues; more than once this meant going to prison. Russell was tutored at home until he was eighteen. Then he entered Cambridge. Until this time his life had been rather solitary, but now a new world opened. At Cambridge he found a group of contemporaries with whom he could have endless discussions on everything. The mental adventure began. It ended only upon his death in 1970. On his eightieth birthday Russell recommended, for longevity, a “habit of hilarious Olympian controversy.” One of the most productive and brilliant thinkers of our age, Russell expressed himself vividly on many aspects of our culture—education, politics, history, manners, morals, war, and peace. A partial list of his writings includes: Mysticism and Logic, and Other Essays (1918), Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919), An Outline of Philosophy (1927), Marriage and Morals (1929), The Scientific Outlook (1931), An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth (1940), History of Western Philosophy (1945), and, in collaboration with Alfred North Whitehead, Principia Mathematica (1910–13). He won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1950. Logic is central in Russell’s philosophy. His views on many things changed profoundly in the course of his life, but these changes all proceeded from successively deeper applications of his logical method. This method dates from the year 1900, which Russell called the most important year of his intellectual life. It was then, at the International Congress of Philosophy in Paris, which Russell attended with Whitehead, that Giuseppe Peano introduced a method for reasoning in symbols. Russell saw that it could extend the region of mathematical precision backward into areas that hitherto had been given over to vague speculation. The project of deducing mathematics from logic also appealed to Whitehead, and they began a remarkable intellectual collaboration. The result is the famous Principia Mathematica. The first two of the following three selections are taken from Mysticism and Logic. In The Study of Mathematics, mathematics is conceived as a purely formal science. It is not derived from experience. And therein, for Russell, lies its beauty. Life can be a pretty muddled affair, “but the world of pure reason knows no compromise, no practical limitations, no barrier to the creative activity….” Russell takes a critical look at educational methods that become so bogged down acquiring the first elements of the subject that the goal is never reached, or even glimpsed. This goal is Plato’s world of “divine necessity,” the world of purely intellectual activity. Russell’s passionate belief in it is contagious. He does not actually lead you inside the temple (he comes out on the steps to talk to you), but he leaves no doubt that the temple is there. In Mathematics and the Metaphysicians, Russell makes the assertion that mathematics is the same thing as formal logic, as founded by Aristotle. But modern logic has gone beyond Aristotle; it has become symbolic. Words have been replaced by symbols that have no reference to the world of things. Why has this been so important in examining the foundations of mathematics? The answer seems paradoxical. Symbolism is useful because it makes things difficult (but only in the beginning). Suspend your common sense when you read this article. You will be asked to believe that there is no such thing as the next moment; that when a thing moves, it is not in a state of motion; that there are just as many even numbers as there are numbers altogether; that the number of days in all time is no greater than the number of years. Russell intends to take the mystery out of mathematics. He does not hesitate to use shock treatment. Traditional mathematics suffered a crisis in the nineteenth century. A vast superstructure of knowledge had been erected without sufficient thought of the foundation. Cracks appeared, hasty repairs were made, but repairs were really not enough. What was needed was a complete reconstruction of the foundation. The following selection is part of this project. Definition of Number is taken from Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, written during World War I. Russell was in jail when he wrote it. He had been imprisoned for several months because he had written a pamphlet accusing the American Army of “intimidating strikes at home.” This was regarded as likely to impair the relationship between Great Britain and America. (The governor of the prison was required to read the manuscript for possible seditious tendencies.) A definition of an idea usually expresses the idea in concepts which are more familiar to us. When the idea is as familiar as “number,” what we say in explanation of it is likely to seem stranger than the thing itself. Thus, a definition of number might seem at first glance to be an arduous and needless task. The predicament of the centipede who was getting along very well until asked which leg came after which seems applicable. However, there is a reason for presenting the familiar in unfamiliar terms. It puts us at a distance from something which, otherwise, is too close to be seen. The habit of mind that is developed in defining the obvious will stand you in very good stead when you enter the world of abstract thought. Your definitions will be your only landmarks.