Author: Robert Louis Stevenson This thoroughly delightful essay has depth and insight too. It pays honor to the wistful dreams and incantations of youth and to the spark of youth and poetry that remains in grown men. It derides Zola and the realists for pretending that the meaning of life lies in humdrum, vulgar, conventional circumstance, and for suppressing joy. “For to miss the joy,” Stevenson says, “is to miss all. In the joy of the actors lies the sense of any action…hence the haunting and truly spectral unreality of realistic books.” But if the motive force of human striving is joy and hidden symbols, would not the true realist be the romancer? Stevenson knows how to pack a great deal of romance into a gaunt realistic setting. The rugged seacoast, the scattering of houses and scraggy vegetation, a few Dickens-like characters furnish the background of the boys’ doings. For those who can see, it also has its enchantments. Stevenson shows us how a mood of mixed fear and exultation was mirrored in the sea: “…the coil of equinoctial tempests; …the boats with their reefed lugsails scudding for the harbour mouth, where danger lay….” The cold eye of the realists, watching the boys at their round of amusements, would see nothing wonderful. They played golf, they went fishing, swam in the sea, and gazed from an eminence at the surrounding country and the steeples of nearby towns. Commonplace pleasures? Yes, when viewed objectively. The greatest joy which they had was quite different. It would appear to a casual observer to be the last word in silliness. Stevenson tells how the boys made a ritual of hiding bull’s-eye lanterns under their top-coats and huddling together in secret discussions at night. So concealed, the lanterns served no purpose, or so it seemed, except to convey a preposterous sense of mystery. Zola, Stevenson says, would have missed the inner meaning and would have turned out a masterly picture of “shallowness and dullness.” Stevenson’s own interpretation of the strange ritual is rich but oblique, and he leaves a great deal to you, the reader. Why does the boy exult and sing over the knowledge that, in the dark night unknown to anyone, he carries under his top-coat a hidden flame? Does the flame symbolize a secret strength, a magical power? And could the boys, in their secret nighttime conversations, have been concerned with anything as important as “the possibilities of existence?” More than one key will sometimes fit the same lock. Each reader has his hidden lantern and is likely to see this thing according to his own light.