Author: Haniel Long The Power Within Us may be characterized as an adventure story, as history, as anthropology, as religion; and it will stand up under the scrutiny of all these disciplines. But its place as a classic is assured first of all by its beauty. It is a piece of prose that had to be written by a poet. It was. Haniel Long was an American of our own day; he died in 1956, a respected critic, historian, and “minor” poet, unaware that in The Power Within Us he had produced a little book which should make, and continually magnify, his reputation. The son of a missionary, he was born in Rangoon, and brought up in Pittsburgh. After Exeter and Harvard, he did newspaper work and college teaching until 1929, when he moved with his family to Santa Fe, New Mexico. There he remained, his heart committed to the American South-west and to the Indians whose land it had been. Among them, and among their friends throughout the country, he was well known, both as a man of great feeling and also as a painstaking writer. This masterpiece of feeling and writing is no longer than a long short story. As a story alone it is spellbinding in the heroic mold of Robinson Crusoe. A “civilized” man is shipwrecked and finds himself confronted with his naked condition, unarmed except by reason and faith. Lost to the sophisticated world in which he was reared, he encounters the true savage and, through this encounter, comes to know his own kind and himself. Thus far, high adventure and wonderment. The Spaniard Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca crosses the United States—centuries before there was a United States—from Florida to the Pacific on foot. His eight-year odyssey (1528–36) ends in Spanish Mexico where, after having long since given up all idea of seeing country or countrymen again, he is “rescued” by those gallants on horseback in whom he sees, to his horror, the man he once was. The Power Within Us is a report of his experience to his “Christian” master, the King of Spain. But this is not fiction; it is truth. And Cabeza was no dreamy sailor boy of fiction equipped like an eagle scout with marvelous powers of improvisation and dexterity; he was a Spanish conquistador, a gentleman of that “irresistible” European culture bred to the mastery of armor and guns, of ships and horses, and of men. He was one of the officers of an imperial expedition of 578 glittering adventurers who believed that “on the pages of history we would share the glory of Cortés and his murderous band….” Wrecked on a coast they had intended to despoil, left to the mercy of natives they had thought to enslave, the 578 soon became 400, and then 40, and then four. There the story begins, the story of the human spirit stripped of all its fine disguises of power, pride, and pomp. Through the whole tradition of the great books, beginning with the Greeks and the “barbarians,” the meaning of civilization is pondered and the meeting of civilized and uncivilized man recited. And as often as not the civilized man comes off second best, not merely in conquest but even in history’s long view of what is and is not civilized. Are the arts of civilization a net gain or a net loss? A loss, says Jean Jacques Rousseau, the French philosopher, who calls mankind back to the woods to enjoy the unadorned existence of the “noble savage.” Cabeza de Vaca’s savages were not noble—nor were they ignoble. They were credulous, and their credulity awakened in the elegant Spaniard a nobility of soul which the life he had known had never aroused. Out of that surprised nobility—where else?—came power. In absolute helplessness, and in it alone, he found the strength to save others and thus himself, and to know himself, and to know what it is to be a man. The Power Within Us—a half hour or so of exciting reading—is a religious experience never to be forgotten. The Naufragios (“Shipwrecks”) of Cabeza de Vaca was published in Spain in the middle of the 16th century and went through many forms before Haniel Long took hold of the historical materials and put them in their present version. To the actual documentation of the terrible expedition Mr. Long added, from his knowledge of the country, the people, and of man himself, the true triumph of the conquistador—a man’s conquest of himself in his search for the power to bear suffering.