Author: William James William James was both a philosopher and a psychologist. His greatest work, the Principles of Psychology, makes major contributions to both fields. The Principles was published in 1890. Earlier than that, he had begun writing articles for the learned journals and lecturing to an ever-increasing public. The first volume of his lectures to be collected appeared in 1897 under the title of the first lecture, The Will to Believe. His study of religious belief, already manifest in this volume, found fullest expression in The Varie ties of Religious Experience, 1902. His most important philosophical works are Pragmatism, 1907, A Pluralistic Universe and The Mean ing of Truth, both of which appeared in 1909, and Essays in Radical Empiricism, 1912. One attraction of James the psychologist lies in his continually going beyond the bounds of his science to raise the broader questions of philosophy. Yet it is no less true that a large part of the fascination of James the philosopher is found in his psychological interest and insight. In The Sentiment of Rationality, reprinted here from The Will to Believe, James raises what is fundamentally a problem of meaning and method: what is to count as an explanation? Other men have written about method, notably Aristotle in the Posterior Analyt ics and Descartes in the Discourse on Method. But neither of them raises, as James does, the question of what feeling an explanation has to satisfy and whether temperament predisposes a person to favor one type of explanation over another. Thus in this essay James analyzes idealism and materialism in terms of the sentiments which they appeal to and satisfy. This leads him later on, in Pragmatism, to propose that all philosophies can be divided into the tender and the tough-minded. However, since both sentiments are to be found in man, he claims that a true and sound philosophy will somehow have to satisfy both. Recognizing the influence in the fixing of belief of “passional tendencies” or “our willing nature,” James attacks what he considers the crudity of scientists who would dismiss all religious belief for not being based on rational evidence. With Pascal, whom he quotes, he appeals to the reasons of the heart “which the reason does not understand.” These, he argues, enter into the judgments of science as well as into those of religion. In this, he emphasizes what more recently has come to be called personal as distinguished from abstractive and objective knowledge. Another side to his defense of religious belief leads to the philosophy of pragmatism. The Will to Believe is dedicated to James’s old friend Charles Sanders Peirce, to whom he attributes the original idea of pragmatism. A simplified version of the pragmatic principle, but one from which James himself would not shrink, might be expressed thus: A belief is true if it works. James accordingly asks us to test our beliefs by looking to their effects or consequences. Such, he points out, is the ordinary procedure by which science tests a hypothesis. From this James goes on to emphasize the importance of the practical in even our most theoretical beliefs. James also insists upon the practical importance of theoretical beliefs. This is reflected in his conviction that philosophy is too important to be left to the experts. It is an enterprise in which every man is engaged. The two essays printed here James calls “essays in popular philosophy.” They are popular not only or mainly because they are written in a fairly nontechnical and even racy style, but because they reflect James’s deep conviction that philosophy is every man’s business.