Author: Plutarch The essay that follows is often titled On Tranquillity. But the tranquil person is, perhaps, a more passive and resigned one than the ideal of Plutarch. In any event, Contentment seems to be closer in meaning to the Greek title of the piece. That is, therefore, the title chosen by the present translator. What is contentment? Who is the contented man? He is, first of all, what might be called a sensible person. He does not covet the impossible; he recognizes the limitations that exist in the world and in the human beings with whom he must deal if he is to live at all. “The business entrusted to your administration,” Plutarch says to Paccius, the friend to whom he addresses the essay, “is in large part served not by straightforward and upright characters, like tools suited to a job, but by uneven and crooked tools.” He urges Paccius to “use them for what they are.” The man who constantly bewails the fact that the world is disappointing cannot be content. He is disappointed because he expected too much. He should have known that nothing is perfect. On the other hand, one cannot be content, either, if he underestimates the world. Contentment is not to be found, Plutarch says, in total resignation, in retirement. One who avoids all public or private business for the sake of contentment is like the man in Euripides’ Orestes who was ordered to go to bed and stay there, as if this would cure all his ailments. Or he would be like Achilles, sitting beside the ships, “a useless burden upon the earth.” Contentment is not obtainable simply by avoiding trouble. To retire from life is cowardly and, besides, involves a betrayal of one’s friends. The truly contented man is one who is active in the world’s and in his own business. He must, nevertheless, regard blessings as probably transitory, and he must be willing and able to accept their loss with equanimity. “No man alive can say,” Plutarch quotes Menander as reminding us, “‘This shall not happen to me.’” It is nonsense to insist that no harm can befall the good man. Of course it can. But the good man can remain content even in the face of disaster. Even death should not be feared. Death is not something to be constantly worrying about. Anyone can imagine circumstances in which it would constitute a change for the better. Contentment depends on reason and knowledge. The soul must be schooled; “sensible people should rehearse” arguments which are specifics for the passions “before the passions arise to have them in stock for greater effectiveness.” Fundamentally, “the culprit is self-love.” Reason tells us that we may expect bad things as well as good, but self-love deludes us into thinking that the universe was created for our sake alone. One who believes that will soon be disappointed. There is only one emotion that reason cannot control and overcome, Plutarch says, and that is regret. But even regret can be lessened if we act well, for then we will have little to regret. Thus contentment is far from a passive state of the soul. The contented man, like the virtuous one, is the man who not only avoids bad deeds, but who also does good ones. To him, Plutarch ends by saying, life is everywhere and at all times a festival. He can “face the future without apprehension or misgivings but with hope glad and shining.” The task of telling us how to be contented is as important as it is difficult. We all want to be contented but are often impatient of advice, especially when we are told to steel ourselves for reverses and to be untroubled when they come. Young people, it is said, have to learn for themselves. But would we learn as well if not prepared by past warnings? On the other hand, does not Plutarch demand too much? How can we be expected to be contented in the midst of disaster or heartbreak? And perhaps discontent would show us a better way out of it than contentment can. In any case, Plutarch’s recipe for contentment prompts us to face up to the subject ourselves.