Author: J.B.S. Haldane John Burdon Sanderson Haldane was born on November 5, 1892, studied at Eton and at New College, Oxford, and was elected a fellow of New College in 1919. He became reader in biochemistry at Cambridge in 1922 and was appointed professor of genetics at London University in 1933. From 1937 to 1957 he was professor of biometry at London, after which he lived and worked in India until his death on December 1, 1964. He published papers on subjects in biology, botany, statistical theory, physiology, and chemistry, as well as a number of popular books. He conducted numerous experiments on the effects of various chemical and physical agents on the human body. In the course of such experiments, he often used himself as subject, subjecting his own body to extreme stresses and strains. He had a wide knowledge of mathematics, as the following selection indicates, and he made contributions to physics, particularly to aspects of the theory of relativity. He was by profession a geneticist. In short, he was remarkably versatile as well as prolific. Also a Marxist, he was from 1940 to 1949 the chairman of the editorial board of the London Daily Worker. It has been claimed that his political views sometimes influenced his scientific ones. If this is so, it is not evident in the famous little essay reprinted here. The main point of the essay is probably perfectly clear. It is that we are ruled, in our physical existence, by mathematics, and in a way that we may never have suspected. “For every type of animal there is a most convenient size, and a large change in size inevitably carries with it a change of form.” We are prisoners of gravity; we could not much alter ourselves without first altering the mathematical laws of nature. Since the latter alteration seems impossible, at least on this planet, it is likely that we will have to be content with our six feet and 180 pounds for a good many eons to come. Haldane does not content himself with pointing out what is, if you think about it, an obvious fact. He explains that “just as there is a best size for every animal, so the same is true for every human institution.” He points out that the Greeks “held that a small city was the largest possible democratic state.” However, he goes on to say that “the English invention of representative government made a democratic nation possible.” Is there an apparent contradiction here? “The higher animals are not larger than the lower because they are more complicated,” says Haldane. “They are more complicated because they are larger.” The surface of something increases as the square of a dimension, the volume as the cube of it. The least “numerate” person will recognize what a dramatic difference this is, when the dimension in question increases markedly. The difference, indeed, might be called tyrannical. Not only are we ruled by mathematics—we are the slaves of mathematics. “Comparative anatomy is largely the story of the struggle to increase surface in proportion to volume.” Haldane’s little essay, a classic, forces us to think about such seemingly obvious matters as size and weight—but in fresh ways. Every paragraph is packed with unexpected ideas. The whole discussion is a perfect example of how a good scientist who is also a good writer can lead the layman to see the world of nature from a novel angle.