Author: Xenophon Xenophon, the Greek historian and essayist, was born in Athens about 430 b.c., of an aristocratic family. He made the acquaintance of the philosopher Socrates, who at the time was instructing the youth of Athens through his brilliant conversations. He may have taken part in the war with Sparta, which ended, in 404, with the downfall of the Athenian empire. In 401 he was asked, along with other Greeks, to join the expedition of the younger Cyrus against the latter’s brother Artaxerxes, who, according to Cyrus, had usurped the Persian throne. Xenophon appears to have accepted the invitation with alacrity, partly, no doubt, because the venture held promise of riches and honor, but also because it gave him an opportunity to escape from the uncongenial atmosphere of democratic Athens. His book, the Anabasis (or “Upcountry March”), is a description of the events that occurred on this expedition. After the main body of the Greeks returned home, Xenophon remained in Asia and served with troops fighting the Persians. He captured a wealthy Persian near Pergamum and the ransom he obtained gave him an income for life. In Greece once more, Xenophon, rather than return to Athens, went into the service of Agesilous, king of Sparta. He fought in a battle against his fellow citizens and was banished by them. The Spartans gave him a home in Elis, where he lived for a time in retirement, hunting, enjoying country life, and writing his memoirs and histories. When Athens and Sparta later became allies, Xenophon’s banishment was repealed. He did not return to Athens, however, but spent his last years at Corinth. The Anabasis is Xenophon’s most famous book, but he also wrote the Cyropaedia, an account of the youth and training of Cyrus, the Hellenica, a continuation of Thucydides’ history to 362, the Memorabilia, a portrait and defense of Socrates, and numerous other works on country life, hunting, military training, and politics. The Persian expedition that Xenophon describes in the Anabasis started from Sardis in 401. Ten thousand Greeks marched inland to Cunaxa, where a great battle was fought in which Cyrus was killed. The Greeks then attempted to negotiate a safe return with the Persian satrap, Tissaphernes, but their officers were treacherously murdered and they were left leaderless, deep in enemy country, without knowledge of the terrain and almost totally without money or supplies. Faced with disaster, the Greeks maintained strict discipline and elected new officers, one of whom was Xenophon. It was he, more than any other leader in that long retreat, who invented the stratagems and maintained the morale of the troops. The selection reprinted here covers the most dramatic part of the journey. It had been decided to march up the valley of the Tigris River and to make for the shores of the Euxine (Black) Sea, where there were several Greek colonies. Part of the way led through the wilds of Kurdistan, where the ten thousand had to defend themselves against almost constant raids by savage tribesmen; and part of the way led through the forbidding and desolate highlands of Armenia and Georgia. The Greeks were a sea-faring, island people, and this march over a thousand miles of rough country was bitter and hard. Many times, Xenophon says, they wanted to give up, but he inspired them to take heart, and they went on. Finally they reached Trebizond. Xenophon, at the center of the line, could hear the vanguard shouting something. He gathered together some cavalry and “rode forward to give support, and, quite soon, they heard the soldiers shouting ‘The sea! The sea!’ and passing the word down the column. Then certainly they all began to run…and when they had all got to the top, the soldiers, with tears in their eyes, embraced each other and their generals and captains.” This scene is one of the most famous in all literature. It bears comparison with Prescott’s account of Cortés’ first view of the valley of Mexico and the story, in the Bible, of Moses and his people looking down on the land of Canaan. Indeed, for these Greeks the sea was the Promised Land. The selection from the Memorabilia portrays Socrates at the zenith and close of his career. For Xenophon, Socrates is the perfect man, the embodiment of the highest humanity and morality. Justice, courage, self-restraint, piety, patriotism were combined in him with affability and kindness, and with a rare ability to impart these qualities to others. It is easy to see that Xenophon is defending Socrates against the charges that had been brought against him at his trial and after. He is saying, in effect: How could such a man have been guilty of “atheism,” of “corrupting the youth,” and of “making the worse appear the better cause”? Plato is also concerned to defend the good name of Socrates. In his dialogues, especially the Phaedo, Crito, and Apology, he also describes Socrates as a model of virtue. In other respects, however, Plato’s portrait is strikingly different from Xenophon’s. Socrates becomes highly complex and subtle, full of charm, ironic humor and paradox—close to common sense, but also to mysticism. His eloquence is said to have paralyzed and bewitched his listeners. Those reputed to be wise ended by bowing to his wisdom, the enchanting youth were themselves enchanted, and the revelers were drunk under the table by the imperturbable Socrates, who continued meanwhile his customary philosophical discourse. A similar contrast is seen in the accounts given of Socrates’ moral teachings. For Plato they are subtle proposals backed by ingenious arguments. For Xenophon they are simply common sense rules of morality and piety. Which of these contrasting reports of Socrates and his teachings is nearer the truth? Most authorities favor Plato’s version. But could not both accounts be valid in a sense? Plato, the greatest pupil of Socrates, would have the closest view and understanding. But Xenophon’s impression was that of a soldier and popular historian, and was intelligible to everyone. It was very effective in clearing Socrates’ name of the false charges that had led to his execution.