Author: Edmund Burke Edmund Burke was born in Dublin. January 12, 1729, is the most probable date. His father, a well-to-do lawyer, was a Protestant, his mother a Roman Catholic. Burke took his B.A. at Trinity College, Dublin. In 1750 he began to read law at the Middle Temple, London. He soon turned to writing. His first two books appeared in 1756. The same year he married the daughter of a Dr. Nugent, of Bath. In 1761 he went back to Dublin for a while in the household of the Secretary for Ireland. When Rockingham became British Prime Minister in 1765, he hired Burke as his secretary. Burke went into Parliament as a member for Wendover. Two speeches on the American problem made his reputation. About this time he joined “The Club,” whose members, then or later, included Dr. Johnson, Gibbon, Adam Smith, Boswell, and Burke’s father-in-law, Dr. Nugent. Burke fought hard to get workable justice for the American Colonies. Out of this quarrel sprang such powerful arguments as his Speech on Conciliation with America and the Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol (see below). Some of his most famous speeches were delivered during his fourteen-year prosecution of Warren Hastings for high crimes in India. Hastings was acquitted. In 1790 Burke’s Reflections on the Revolution in France became the manifesto of conservative Europe. George III and Catherine of Russia praised it. It ran through eleven editions in about a year. Thomas Paine replied to it in The Rights of Man. Most of the other Whig leaders favored the French Revolution at first. Thus Burke was thrust more and more outside his party’s councils. In 1794 he resigned from Parliament. He was given a pension of £2,500. The Duke of Bedford and Lord Lauderdale objected to this. Burke replied with a last great flash of eloquence in A Letter to a Noble Lord. He died on July 9, 1797. In the late twentieth century we have speeches and White House press conferences on the television networks. At the same moment a whole nation may see and listen to the President, a senator, or a candidate. Burke, like Lincoln and Washington, spoke to a few hundred people. His printed words might reach a few thousand more. He held no great offices, led no armies, put his name to no important treaties. So we find it hard to imagine how he gained his tremendous reputation. Part of the answer lies in his concentration. He was a statesman— altogether that, and nothing but that. Everything he did was done in that light. Unlike Cicero, his model as a writer and a man, he was not an effective orator. He lacked the commanding voice and presence. Nor was he a great politician. His record, as a party strategist and at the polls, is dotted with errors. Moreover, he seems to have been—a little too often—the honorable champion of lost causes. But he comes down to us, formidable still, as the great framer of issues. He was the one man in his nation and time who could fasten on some political problem, spell it out in bold letters, and place it in relation to the general ideas that influence the life of mankind. His talent is close to its best in a Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol. Here his famous style—large, firm, bold—builds a solid house of argument. When the letter was written, he was a member of Parliament from Bristol, at that time the second largest city in England. It is a “letter” in format only—in fact, like all his writings, it is a speech. He is aware that he has been criticized for “steadily pursuing the pernicious maxim of not obeying the voice of his constituents.” Here—to the sheriffs, who were important local officials, and through them to the voters—Burke gives an account of his recent service in Parliament and of the motives that led him to act as he did. But this is only the immediate pretext for his letter. He writes in the midst of the American Revolution. He knows that many of the voters in his district are anti-American. He lays out the full force of his logic in the hope that he can persuade them to his own views. Here his political intentions and his devotion to the ruling ideas of freedom and justice merge in one powerful argument. Thoroughness, as John Morley said, was one of his great virtues. He knows what he is talking about. He does not set Englishmen against Americans, as the war has done. He speaks of both as Englishmen, and argues that what hurts one hurts the other. The partial suspension of habeas corpus is as dangerous to English liberty as it is unjust to Americans. “Bodies,” he writes, “tied together by so unnatural a bond of union as mutual hatred are only connected to their ruin.” So he pleads for a quick ending to the war in “an honourable and liberal accommodation.” Few Englishmen listened. Burke and his friends could only wait for the muffled drums of Yorktown in 1781.