Author: Immanuel Kant Born in Königsberg in 1724, the son of a saddler of Scottish ancestry, Immanuel Kant remained in this bleak Baltic city throughout his long life. There he went to school, acquiring a fine command of classical languages, in an atmosphere of gentle but inflexible pietism, which may have added to the austerity of his attitude toward life. At the University of Königsberg, from the age of sixteen to twenty-two, he studied Newton’s physics and Wolff’s philosophy—an offshoot of Leibniz’ system. To make ends meet, he tutored sons of the nobility. In 1755 he became an unsalaried lecturer at the University and remained in this humble post for fifteen years. He was made Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in 1770. By this time he was already famed for his publications. In one of these he had propounded the nebular theory of the origin of the solar system, maintaining against Newton that the solar system could have arisen from a spiral nebula. He had also advanced original ideas on the proofs of the existence of God. Still more important were his meditations on the writings of David Hume, for these were destined to change the whole course of his thought and to direct the history of philosophy into a new channel. Kant is best known for his three “Critiques.” In the first and greatest of these, The Critique of Pure Reason (1781), he undertook to vindicate the rigor and certainty of mathematics and mathematical physics, which had been upset by the skeptical arguments of Hume. In the second, The Critique of Practical Reason (1788), he attempted to vindicate religious beliefs and to demonstrate the ra tional certainty and universality of the moral law. The latter theme had also been developed in Fundamental Principles of the Meta physic of Morals (1785). In The Critique of Judgement, in turn, he showed how mechanics and purpose could be reconciled, and developed a very original and important theory of beauty. Kant’s life is summed up in his writings, and there is little else to tell. He remained a bachelor and lived mostly in seclusion. Although cold, formal, austere, and often pedantic, he nevertheless reached sublime heights in his respect for universal law and the worth of the individual. One of his lasting insights was that we must not permit ourselves any act which we would condemn in another. When the Holy Roman Empire gradually fell apart, modern nations arose which recognized no higher authority. The need for some new community or covenant of nations, capable of settling disputes peacefully, was keenly felt. In the sixteenth century, Erasmus addressed himself to the subject and was followed by Hugo Grotius, William Penn, Abbé de Sainte-Pierre, Rousseau, and Bentham. Kant’s Perpetual Peace, written in 1795, when he was seventy-one years old, shows the impact of his predecessors, especially Rousseau, but adds a great deal that is novel in shrewdness, logical acumen, and broad perspective. Since the subject of international peace is now becoming more crucial every year, it behooves us to take a good look at some of the provisions which Kant thought necessary to this end. His first preliminary article for perpetual peace condemns all treaties which tacitly reserve, or gloss over, issues that may lead to future war. A sovereign who makes such a treaty intends to honor it only so long as it serves his purpose. Kant might not mind calling such an agreement a “truce,” but to call it a “treaty of peace” is rank deception, destroying that mutual trust which is the only foundation of peace. “Honesty is the best policy” is the deepest strand in Kant’s thought. Though the whole world should go up in smoke, honesty must be maintained. He lays down the following “transcendent formula of public right”: “…all the actions relative to the right of another whose maxim is not susceptible to publicity are unjust.” It follows at once, he says, that revolution is never justified, even if its object is to overthrow a usurping tyrant. Why? Because the insurgent people would not dare to publish their design of revolt in advance. We can better understand this extreme position if we remember that in 1793 Louis XVI was executed, and that by 1795, when Kant published Perpetual Peace, French revolutionary armies, successful everywhere, threatened to topple monarchs all over Europe. Treaties of peace, to anticipate Woodrow Wilson’s language, must be “open” and “openly arrived at.” There must be no hidden clauses except one. Kant insists that philosophers must be consulted about the provisions of treaties yet concedes that it would be humiliating for the monarch to confess in public that he depends on the wisdom of mere subjects. But would Kant have also insisted on full publicity of the stages of protracted negotiations between nations? That delicate negotiations are crippled by day-to-day reporting has been argued, in our own time, by Walter Lippmann. Another requirement for perpetual peace is that the participating governments be republican in form. This will provide that the assent of each citizen shall be required for a declaration of war. It is not likely that the people themselves, who suffer all the calamities of war, will give their assent. Here Kant’s position seems very strong. It is not as strong as it looks, however, for “republicanism” is not democracy; it thrives best, in fact, under monarchy. It is the people’s representatives who decide on war, not the people, nor yet the monarch. Kant distrusted the people. But would they be fooled about the necessity or advantages of war as often as their representatives are? The quality of Kant’s essay is keen and challenging, sometimes warning of dangers, remote then, but real today. If hostile nations are prepared to employ any means, however infernal, so long as the enemy is subdued, all hope of peace may be extinguished, Kant argues. A war might then “cause the destruction of both parties at once, together with the annihilation of every right, [and] would permit the conclusion of a perpetual peace only upon the vast burial ground of the human species.”