Author: Sir Arthur Eddington Arthur Stanley Eddington was born in England in 1882. He was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was senior wrangler in 1904. (For a discussion of the intellectual eminence implied by this position, see the selection from Galton’s Hereditary Genius.) He was elected a fellow of Trinity and, in 1913, at the age of thirty-one, made the Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy at Cambridge. He succeeded a long line of distinguished scientists in this position; his immediate predecessor was Sir George Darwin, son of Charles. Eddington made contributions to the theory of star clusters and, more important, to the theory of the evolution of stars; the latter are contained in his book, The Internal Constitution of the Stars (1926). He was deeply interested in Einstein’s theory of relativity, and besides doing research which helped to validate its predictions, he wrote several popular books explaining the theory to laymen. Among them is Space, Time and Gravitation (1920). His interest in the new theory had a broad base. He believed that many observed facts could be predicted by means of pure mathematical reasoning; that is, he felt that most of the fundamental constants of nature could be calculated without recourse to experiment, and he performed astounding feats of calculation to prove his point. Relativity was grist for his mill; by means of it and other theories he even claimed to be able to calculate definitely the number of electrons in the universe. His claim has been considered by many later physicists to be over ambitious. Eddington himself appeared to believe that in this and similar contentions he was merely carrying to their inevitable conclusions the fundamental assumptions of modern physics. The Nature of the Physical World, a work of popular exposition that exerted wide intellectual influence, appeared in 1928. The following selection is a chapter from that work. Eddington died on November 22, 1944. The second law of thermodynamics, as Eddington explains it, is simplicity itself: “Entropy always increases”—that is all there is to it. Entropy is “the practical measure of the random element which can increase in the universe but can never decrease.” The law holds, Eddington says, “the supreme position among the laws of nature.” As such, it is of great importance. But it is also fraught with grave consequences. Entropy is “time’s arrow”; it points in one direction—to the future—and in one direction only. It is the law of nature which puts “some sense into the world.” That is, it is the bridge between the apparently cold, inhuman, mathematical world of the primary laws of physics, and the—perhaps again apparently—warm, disorderly and familiar world which we sense and in which we live. Furthermore, Eddington points out, it must follow from the law that the farther back we go in time the more organized, the less shuffled (to use his metaphor), the world must have been. Such a process—whether we consider it backward or forward—cannot, he says, be conceived as going on infinitely. The universe must have had a beginning, then, and must be expected to have an end. The law demands both. This conclusion does not mean that Eddington is here disputing the claim that science can tell us nothing about the end and the beginning—“the first and the last catastrophe.” Whether the world was created in the first place, and whether it will rejuvenate itself in the last, are, Eddington says, from the strictly scientific point of view questions susceptible only to “pure speculation.” On the question whether the universe is running down once and for all, “science is silent,” Eddington says, “and all that one can say is prejudice.” He is willing, in his last paragraph, to be prejudiced—but toward a view which many people would call pessimistic. He is opposed to the assumption of “a never-ending cycle of rebirth of matter and worlds.” “I am an Evolutionist,” he says, “not a Multiplicationist.”