Author: Alfred North Whithead Alfred North Whitehead, one of the most outstanding philosophers of recent times, was born in Ramsgate, England, in 1861. He was the son of the Reverend Alfred W.Whitehead, who was then headmaster of a private school. The educational and religious atmosphere of his home, the participation of his family in community affairs, and the surrounding countryside, rich in historical relics, all exerted a permanent influence on the younger Whitehead. He had a deep sense of the past, and a secure feeling of being at home in the world. In 1880 Whitehead entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he remained as student and Fellow until 1910. Then, for thirteen years, he was at the Imperial College of Science and Technology in Kensington. In 1924, rather than accept retirement because of old age, he moved to America and became professor of philosophy at Harvard. It was there that he was able to give the fullest expression to his own philosophy. He once remarked: “From twenty on I was interested in philosophy, religion, logic and history. Harvard gave me a chance to express myself.” During this time he wrote Science and the Modern World, Process and Reality, and Adventures in Ideas. He was senior member of Harvard’s Society of Fellows until his death in 1947. The first phase of Whitehead’s intellectual development was devoted to logic and mathematics. During this period, he wrote A Treatise on Universal Algebra and, together with Bertrand Russell, Principia Mathematica. This second work, which undertakes to establish the logical foundations of mathematics, has been called one of the greatest contributions to logic since Aristotle. The Prin cipia, like that of Isaac Newton, set the fashion for decades to come, so that research in symbolic language became a major branch of mathematics. This program of “logicalizing” all of mathematics took ten years and ran into three volumes. The patience of investigation required is illustrated by the fact that the proof of the proposition 1+1=2, which appears as Theorem 110.643, is not given until page 83 of the second volume. In his second phase of development, Whitehead turned to the philosophy of science. He wrote Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge, The Concept of Nature, The Principles of Relativity, and Introduction to Mathematics, a classic popularization of the subject. The following selection, “On Mathematical Method,” is taken from this last work. Here Whitehead examines the fundamental ideas that form the foundations of mathematics rather than the technical processes by which problems are actually solved. Whitehead once said: “It is a profoundly erroneous truism, repeated by copybooks and by eminent people when they are making speeches, that we should cultivate the habit of thinking of what we are doing. The precise opposite is the case. Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them.” In mathematics, “not thinking of what we are doing” is, Whitehead points out, the essence of abstraction, the importance of which lies in the fact that it is only by abstracting that we can form ideas of the universe. Whitehead illustrates how abstraction leads to new ways of thinking, so that facts and relationships hitherto unknown come to light. The invention of variables, possible only after the invention of algebra, led to the formulation of laws about things that change. With the concept of variability, and using the method of abstraction, Newton was able to establish the law of gravity. Whitehead defends the unworldly quality of mathematical inquiry, saying that “the really profound changes in human life all have their ultimate origin in knowledge pursued for its own sake.” Abstract theorizing led Faraday to important discoveries in electricity. It took practical ability to develop the modern uses of electricity, but, to Whitehead, a world dominated by practical men is symbolized in the fate of Archimedes as told by Plutarch. On the Nature of a Calculus examines the way in which tools for abstracting are forged. Such a tool is called a calculus. It is the art of manipulating signs according to certain fixed rules. Arithmetic is a calculus; so are algebra and trigonometry. The branch of mathematics invented by Newton and Leibniz was considered so important that it was called the calculus. The most significant thing about these tools is that after they have been invented they seem to lead a life of their own. A mathematician often feels that he is in the position of simply watching them to see what they will do. If we can imagine one set of tools making another set of tools, we have a picture of the growth of mathematics. “Device is piled upon device,” says Whitehead. But he rejects the idea that mathematics can become completely divorced from the world of things. A calculus may consist of symbols that stand for other symbols, but, if it is not to be frivolous, it must ultimately refer to some reality. The rarefied atmosphere of Abstract Thought is not an outer space reserved for professional mathematicians. If you have learned to add two and five without asking “Two and five what?” you already have both feet off the ground—higher than you think. You are now air-borne. The rest is just a matter of gaining altitude.