Author: George Washington George Washington, the undisputed “father of his country,” was born on February 22 (New Style; Feb. 11, Old Style), 1732, in Westmoreland County, Virginia. The son of a large Virginia landowner who died when George was only eleven, he spent most of his youth at the Mount Vernon estate with his beloved half brother Lawrence, who was many years his senior. Although he got little schooling, he taught himself some mathematics, and at the age of fifteen had begun his career as a surveyor. This, of course, was not to be his main profession. Notwithstanding his reported distaste for deception and fighting, he was soon drawn into military operations against the French on the Ohio frontier. In 1755 he was an aid to General Braddock in his disastrous campaign against Fort Duquesne, and was then, at the age of twenty-three, made commander of all the Virginia forces. At the death of his half brother, Washington inherited the plantation at Mount Vernon. Shortly thereafter he married a wealthy widow, Martha Dandridge Custis, who brought him 15,000 acres and 150 slaves. Washington was now a gentleman farmer and a very wealthy man. He took a great interest in farming and experimental agriculture, and became a member of the Virginia House of Burgesses. As a leader of the opposition to British colonial policy in Virginia, he served as a delegate to the Continental Congress in 1774–75, which was organizing the defense of the colonies. In 1775 he was made Commander in Chief of the Continental Army. Washington’s task was to lead the poorly trained and poorly paid Continental troops to a decisive victory over the seasoned British armies, led by top-notch officers. He himself had no experience in large-scale military operations. Money and supplies of all sorts were grievously short. Most of the thirteen states, newly declared independent, were organizing their governments. There were many conflicts among them and they were weakened within by British sympathizers. The Continental Congress was without force or authority. Yet, as we all know, the war was won after five bitter years. The British surrendered at Yorktown in 1781. Washington retired in 1783 after dismissing the army, but he was not able to remain a private citizen for long. The thirteen states were torn with dissension, and there was an imperative need for “a more perfect union” if the new nation was to endure and expand westward. Eventually, in 1787, the Constitutional Convention was called. All the great prestige of Washington was necessary to secure the adoption of the new United States Constitution, which greatly restricted the powers of the independent states. There was no question who would be chosen as the first President of the United States, nor could anyone but Washington have done so much, in the first few years, to stabilize the government and unify the country. After eight years in office, he retired gratefully in 1797, and lived his last two years peacefully on his Mount Vernon estate. First in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen” is almost too good to be true, and yet it is true, in large measure, of Washington. It does not mean that he was always unanimously approved. We remember that in 1777 the war, under his leadership, had gone so disastrously that high officers and members of the Congress tried to have him removed from the command. Sectionalism also played a part in this serious intrigue, which, however, Washington successfully countered. The winter in Valley Forge, however, was one of appalling misery for the battered and freezing army. Washington felt great sympathy for the troops, but he never lost heart; his courage was an example to all. In the spring new strength came, and the war took a brighter turn. It is this unwavering forti- tude and greatness with which he met every crisis that outweigh his shortcomings, and keep his image enshrined in our memory. Washington’s letter to the governors of all the states in 1783 grappled with the big problems of that time. After the five terrible years of war, there was a natural craving for ease and comfort, and a tendency also to return to the old conflicts that divided sections of the country, states, classes, individuals. Washington pleads for fraternal unity. He argues that “it is indispensable to the happiness of the individual states that there should be lodged somewhere a supreme power to regulate and govern the general concerns of the confederated republic, without which the Union cannot be of long duration.” The obligations contracted during the war must be honorably discharged, and the ignominy of national bankruptcy averted. It would be a shameful thing if the soldiers who have won the war should now, deprived of their promised pay, be obliged to beg for food from door to door. “It therefore is more than a common debt, it is a debt of honor; it can never be considered as a pension or gratuity.” The Farewell Address, thirteen years later, touches on some of the same themes, but also on new ones. Washington has been President now for two terms, and has refused to consider a third. In his first administration he had struck a balance between the conservative Federalists and the liberal Republicans, making Hamilton Secretary of the Treasury and Jefferson Secretary of State. But in his second administration he had swung to the Federalists’ side, and had been roundly censured by the Republicans. Now he appeals again for national unity and solidarity. Bear in mind the common bonds of brotherhood, he counsels. “With slight shades of difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits, and political principles. You have in a common cause fought and triumphed together.” Independence and liberty have been won by collective efforts and are collective blessings. He warns again against the dangers of sectionalism, and insists that strong government, with properly balanced powers, provides the only guarantee, in a large country, of the continued enjoyment of liberty. What is most novel and controversial in the Address is the warning against entangling alliances. Existing treaties should be honored in full, Washington says, but “it is unnecessary and would be unwise to extend them…. There can be no greater error than to expect…real favors from nation to nation.” Should we take this dictum of Washington’s to apply to all nations or only to small or weak ones? The United States of 1796 could not have entered an equal alliance with a strong power. A wide ocean favored its independence on one side, and the vast territory on the other side aroused just fears of foreign penetration. But the strength and circumstances of other countries are very different. Are the nations who choose neutrality today strong or weak? Finally, can a policy which seemed wise in those days be maintained inflexibly in our contemporary world?