Author: Ivan Petrovich Pavlov Pavlov was born in the district of Ryazan, in Russia, in 1849. He studied science and medicine at St. Petersburg and received a medical degree in 1883, but he chose to follow a career of research rather than practice medicine. In 1891, he was appointed director of the physiological department of the Institute of Experimental Medicine, in St. Petersburg; in 1895, he was made a professor at the Medical Academy. Later he was elected to the Russian Academy of Sciences and was made a foreign member of the British Royal Society. He won the Nobel Prize in 1904 for physiology and medicine and continued to accumulate fame and honors for the rest of his long life. He died on February 27, 1936. Pavlov is best known for his work on conditioned, or modified, reflexes in experimental animals, but he did research in many areas of physiology. He worked on the problem of digestion, and he was much concerned, as the following selection shows, with the question of the activity of the central nervous system. He was a brilliant experimentalist, devising new and original methods of handling animals so that they could be observed under normal conditions. He was a meticulous scientist who took great care that his laboratory, as well as his reasoning, was uncluttered. He has had an important influence on the course which modern psychology has followed. The first thing to consider in the following selection is the title of it. It is a “scientific study.” And it is concerned with the “so-called psychical processes in the higher animals.” The two phrases are both significant. Pavlov himself emphasizes his use of the word “so-called.” Psychical processes in higher animals are not directly observable. We cannot get into the mind of a dog and see how it works, or if it “works” at all. Since this is so, such processes can only be assumed. “The naturalist must consider only one thing,” Pavlov writes: “what is the relation of this or that external reaction of the animal to the phenomena of the external world?” This is what it means to him to be “scientific.” In this sense, it is behavior alone that can be studied scientifically. It is the obligation of natural science “to ascertain completely how a living being maintains itself in constant equilibrium with its environment.” Such equilibrium is a matter of give-and-take, but its psychological aspects are mysterious. Indeed, Pavlov says, the study of the “physiology of the highest parts of the central nervous system…has been cluttered with foreign ideas, borrowed from psychology.” The implication would seem to be that psychology is not a natural science, and therefore not relevant to Pavlov’s concern. This position—that the scientist ought only to investigate the external behavior of organic as well as inorganic beings—is often taken by modem scientists. (It can be traced back at least as far as Claude Bernard.) Behavior can be measured; and measurement has been said to be the essence of science. What cannot be measured is illusory, it is sometimes contended. The supporters of the position can point to the great success of quantitative methods not only in physics and chemistry, but in the biological sciences as well. Other modern scientists have wondered whether there is not something more to the science of man than Pavlov appears to allow. The argument cannot be ended by a few pages, written by exponents of either side. It is Pavlov’s ultimate goal that “the human mind will contemplate itself not from within but from without.” But it may be asked if such a view is sufficient. Is it really possible to understand man, or for that matter the outside world, without the view from within?