Author: John Bagnell Bury John Bagnell Bury, classicist and historian, was born at Monaghan, Ireland, in 1861, the son of an Anglican clergyman of more than ordinary learning. The boy was taught Greek and Latin at an early age. By the time he was ten he had exhausted the ingenuity of his tutor at Foyle College, Londonderry, who could find no question in Greek grammar too difficult for his pupil. Subsequently, Bury carried off all the prizes in classics at Trinity College, Dublin, from which he was graduated in 1882. In 1885 he was made a fellow of the College, having achieved distinction as a philologist with two books on the Odes of Pindar. He had by then become interested in history, however, and in 1889 he published a work on the later Roman Empire that was received with high praise. In consequence of this, he was in 1895 appointed to a professorship in history. Thereafter he produced a steady stream of scholarly books, including an annotated edition of Gibbon in seven volumes (1896–1900), and a History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great (1900) which at once became a standard text. As these works firmly established Bury’s reputation, he was the logical choice for Regius Professor of Modern History at Cambridge when Lord Acton died; and, being appointed to that august chair in 1902, he occupied it until his death in 1927. Throughout his later life he continued to publish works which ranged from the most detailed monographs to the widely read History of Freedom of Thought (1913) and The Idea of Progress (1920). In all, his bibliography amounted to no less than 369 items, while his erudition extended to perhaps a dozen languages, including Hebrew, Sanskrit, and Hungarian. In this chapter of The Ancient Greek Historians, Bury appraises the work of the “Father of History,” as Herodotus has been called. He was not the first historian, however, any more than Hippocrates, who is termed the “Father of Medicine,” was the first physician. So much does not come out of nothing. We are amazed at the complexity of the medical tradition that lay behind Hippocrates; we are surprised also by the amount of historical literature that had accumulated in fifth-century Greece, which Herodotus could have absorbed before he set out on his most important journeys to Babylonia and Egypt. Other much older civilizations, such as the Indian, had little sense of history, or even of chronology. In explaining the long geographical sections of The History, Bury says that Herodotus was following the example set by Hecataeus and his “school,” and points out that the geography of Egypt and Scythia had a “practical interest” for Athenians. The geography is not something imported from outside, as had been supposed, but is a calculated part of the story. So also are the numerous digressions. They add piquancy and charm, and rest the mind from a too continuous narrative. The invented dialogues also enliven The History, lending verisimilitude and fascination. Herodotus’ aim, unlike the modern scientific historian’s, was to capture the mind of the ordinary reader. In his dialogues, digressions, and epic sweep, Herodotus followed the model of his greatest master—the poet Homer. The Iliad, as you will remember, abounds in digressions and resounding speeches, and it also recounts the war of Greeks and Ionians. Herodotus’ epic theme, in The History, is not merely the military conflict of Greece and Persia, but also the clash of two very different civilizations—the liberty of “Hellenic constitutionalism” v. “oriental autocracy.” Although he was born in Ionia, under the sway of Persia, Herodotus’ sympathies are clearly with the Greeks, or rather, the Athenians. In this respect also, as Bury implies, he was not a scientific historian. Yet in spite of his bias, which most of us probably share, Herodotus wrote “universal history,” depicting life on both sides of the trenches, and thus giving us “a lesson in the unity of history”—“the common history of man.” He (and his immediate predecessors) also made an important advance in de-mythologizing human history. In the Iliad, the gods are the principal actors or at least pull the strings, whereas in The History they are gently pushed aside and deflated by irony. Not entirely, to be sure, for portents and other supernatural influences are still accepted, not only as reports, but as facts. Yet Herodotus’ skepticism, though mixed with naïve, often piquant, gullibility, was a signal advance in the writing of history. Bury thinks Herodotus’ maxims of historical criticism are all valid. The historian should “suspect superhuman and miraculous occurrences, which contradict ordinary experience.” When there is a conflict of evidence, he should “keep an open mind,” and observations of results and “first-hand oral information” are more trustworthy than “stories at second hand.” Bury regrets only that Herodotus did not follow his own maxims more consistently. He calls attention to numbers of glaring errors of fact and interpretation in The History, some of which are enough in themselves “to stamp Herodotus as more of an epic poet than a historian.” This judgment, in spite of Bury’s praise, is so severe that the generous reader may want to make some defense of Herodotus. Could we not say that the business of the historian is not only to report the facts correctly, but also to construct a plausible picture of the past—to make it live? This is Herodotus’ special talent. His version of the Persian War will outlive better-documented accounts, partly because it captures the true color and momentum of the period.