Author: Walter Horatio Pater Walter Pater was born in England on August 4, 1839. His father, Richard, came from a Dutch family and was born in New York; he had moved to England several years before Walter’s birth. Walter was educated at the King’s School, Canterbury, and at Queen’s College, Oxford. He remained at Oxford as a private tutor until 1864, when he was elected a fellow of Brasenose College. In 1868 his essay Aesthetic Poetry appeared in the Fortnightly Re view; it was followed by critical essays on Leonardo, Pico, Botticelli, Michelangelo, and others. These were collected in a volume, Studies in the History of the Renaissance, which appeared in 1873. The celebrated “Conclusion” to this work is reprinted below. Pater now became the center of a small circle of critics and aestheticians; the Pre-Raphaelites were among his friends. He published a novel, Marius the Epicurean, in 1885. This was hailed by his followers as the gospel of a new movement; it advocated devotion to an aesthetic ideal of life, and its perfection of style and calm elevation of tone lent force to the claim. Pater continued to write, publishing a series of philosophical essays in fictional form in 1887 called Imaginary Portraits, and in 1893 the critical work Plato and Plato nism. In his later life Pater returned to the religious fervor of his youth, and it is said that if he had lived he might have taken orders. He died, however, on July 30, 1894, at the age of fifty-four. Two volumes of his essays and a novel were published after his death, and the collected edition of his writings appeared in 1901. The highest goal of human beings, according to Plato and Aristotle, is disinterested intellectual contemplation. For Epicurus and Lucretius, the ideal of life was mild pleasure exempt from pain and trouble. Neither ideal, as Pater saw, excluded a certain intensity of experience. Intellectual contemplation was for him no mere passive beholding of truth; it also involved the joy of discovery. There was an exquisite poise and ardor in the gentle, undemanding friendships of the Epicureans, and courage in their acceptance of nature, which was conceived to be indifferent to man and his fate. Pater developed and exaggerated this element in Epicureanism in his Marius the Epicurean. In Plato’s doctrine, Pater emphasized the soul’s reckless ascent to the highest truth and beauty and to the most intense experience. What gives value to life, he insisted, are the ecstasies, the high moments of realization. Humdrum virtues and mediocre achievements are a weariness. “Hitch your wagon to a star,” as Emerson said. Think nothing of the sacrifice; be contented only with the finest—the finest phrase, the finest composition and color—the most consummate style in whatever you do. The Renaissance was a subject to Pater’s taste. Never before in history, except for a short period in Athens, had so many geniuses accumulated in one small peninsula. In spite of the suffering due to disease, internal wars, and invasions, life reached a feverish pitch of creative achievement. Pater could point to Renaissance Italy as a living model of his ideal. In the “Conclusion” of this book, he tells us that the way to success in life is to pass quickly from ecstasy to ecstasy. It is “to burn always with this hard, gemlike flame.” Like Rousseau, in his Émile, Pater thinks it is the forming of habits which robs us of spontaneity. If we are to maintain ecstasy, he says, we must avoid these stereotypes.