Author: Leonhard Euler The story of mathematics during the eighteenth century is centered upon Leonhard Euler. He was the most prolific mathematical author of all time. It has been estimated that sixty to eighty large quarto volumes would be needed for his collected work. Not all of it, however, has stood the meticulous inspection of this century. Armed with the powerful tools invented by Descartes, Newton, and Leibniz, mathematicians of Euler’s day were busy and optimistic, unhampered by the wary self-criticism of modern times. Euler was born in 1707, at Basel in Switzerland. He received the degree of Master of Arts from the University of Basel at the age of seventeen. Three years later he was invited to join the Academy at St. Petersburg (Leningrad). In those days mathematicians were frequently connected with a royal court. Euler held such posts successively under Catherine I of Russia, Frederick the Great of Prussia, and Catherine the Great of Russia. Royal patronage was not always predictable, but esteem for learning crossed national lines. When a Russian army invaded Germany in 1760 and pillaged a farm belonging to Euler, his losses were immediately made good by the Russian Empress. Euler enriched mathematics in every department. He is considered one of the founders of modern analysis. Although his energy was as remarkable as his genius, he overtaxed himself. His last years were spent in total blindness. Despite this handicap he continued his labors, aided by his powerful memory. His productivity continued until his death in 1783. Topology (geometria situs) has been called rubber-sheet geometry. It examines geometric properties that are unaffected when we stretch or twist or otherwise change an object’s size and shape. Euler’s memoir on the Königsberg bridges is one of the foundation stones of this branch of mathematics. The Seven Bridges of Königs berg resulted from what might be called mathematical recreation. But the small amusement of the Königsberg townsfolk disclosed an important scientific principle to Euler. It is interesting to notice the importance of the symbols used in solving this problem. The symbols themselves suggest relationships between the bridges and the land areas that are not apparent from inspection of the picture. N.R.Campbell has written of this aspect of mathematical analysis. Mathematical puzzles often lead to important discoveries, but they need no excuse beyond intellectual delight. You may want to stop at the end of paragraph fifteen and try to discover for yourself the simplification mentioned by Euler.