Author: La Bruyère The French critic and essayist Jean de la Bruyère was born in Paris in 1645, the son of a commoner who was a government official. He studied at the University of Orléans and passed the bar examination, but he never practiced law. In 1673 he bought a post in the Revenue Department at Caen that conferred prestige and an income. He sold the post fourteen years later and returned to Paris. A few years earlier, La Bruyère had been introduced to the Condé household by the influential historian and theologian Bishop Bossuet. The Prince de Condé was one of the great nobles of France, and La Bruyère was engaged to tutor Condé’s grandson, Louis, due de Bourbon. He also taught the young man’s child wife, Mlle de Nantes, a daughter of Louis XIV. At the age of forty, soon after entering the Condé household, La Bruyère published the first edition of his great work, the Characters. The work consisted of short portrait sketches, some of them translated from the Greek of Theophrastus, some original with La Bruyère. Many of the portraits, though they were given classical names, depicted courtiers and literary figures of the time. La Bruyère made many enemies, but the friendship of Bossuet and the influence of Condé were sufficient protection. La Bruyère continued to bring out new editions of his book, each containing more biting and satirical characters than the last. The books were read avidly, if indignantly, and a series of “keys” were circulated in manuscript purporting to identify the persons he described. Because so many powerful literary figures were offended by his work, La Bruyère was turned down by the French Academy on three different occasions. Finally, in 1693, his friends pushed through his election. His speech of admission, thoroughly unrepentant, was criticized as sharply as his books. This speech, a few letters to Condé, a disputed posthumous treatise, and the successive editions of the Characters are all that survive of what was probably a considerable body of writings. La Bruyère died suddenly on May 10, 1696. His classical model, Theophrastus (371/370–288/287 b.c.), the Greek philosopher and scientist, was a friend and student of both Plato and Aristotle, and the latter’s successor as director of the Lyceum at Athens. He produced two extant works of botany and a collection of ethical Characters—brief, witty delineations of moral types. The publication of the Characters in 1592, in a Latin version by Casaubon, immediately created a vogue. Scores of authors, both in England and France, began to produce books of characters. Some imitated the moral, philosophical tone of Theophrastus, but others were sharp and satirical. Many writers saw in the Theophrastian characters an ideal way to express their criticisms of society—and of their enemies. No one, perhaps, was a more successful writer of characters than La Bruyère, whose work had the advantage of appearing after nearly a century of experiment with the form. He learned from his predecessors, particularly what should be avoided in a character, and added to this knowledge an extremely ready wit, a precise faculty of observation, and the capacity to write what is called classical French style better than any other French writer, it is said, with the single exception of Racine. La Bruyère was a conservative man. In “the battle of the books,” he took the side of the ancients, holding that their books excelled those of the moderns. He respected royalty and would not tolerate revolutionary or even critical ideas in politics or religion. As a tutor in the household of a great prince, however, he could observe at firsthand the corruption of high society and court life. The pretensions of hypocritical courtiers, of would-be intellectuals, sanctimonious churchmen, and the newly rich all lay before him. La Bruyère was too intelligent and independent to tolerate the vice, wastefulness, and stupidity that he saw all around him. But he satirized individuals rather than the traditions and institutions. He showed his sympathy with the poor by ridiculing the people who exploited them, but he did not attack the institutions which kept them impoverished. He exposed the monumental selfishness of the high official Champagne, who wallowed in luxuries while depriving the poor of bread; but he said nothing against the venal system of government in which Champagne held office. It is perhaps this shortcoming in La Bruyère which has kept him from being ranked with such great essayists and social critics as Montaigne and Voltaire. He did not examine into causes, as they did, but only exposed their symptoms on the surface of life. On the other hand, La Bruyère has much of Montaigne’s urbane wit, and there are flashes of bitter truth in his Characters that would do credit to Voltaire. He reminds us often of a great artist who requires only half a dozen lines to draw a portrait. In swiftness and skill, his characterizations have never been surpassed.