Author: Virginia Woolf Virginia Woolf was born at Kensington, January 25, 1882. She was the second daughter of Sir Leslie Stephen and his second wife. Sir Leslie was a well-known essayist and editor of the Diction ary of National Biography. Virginia Woolf was related to several famous Victorian families, including the Darwins. During her childhood many literary men of the day came to visit her father. Ruskin was one of these early acquaintances. Delicate health kept Virginia from attending school, and her father educated her. He allowed her free run of his library; and, despite her lack of formal schooling, she was much better read than most women of her time. In 1905, shortly after her father’s death, Virginia, with her sister Vanessa and her brothers Adrian and Thoby, moved to a section of London called Bloomsbury. Their house was a popular meeting place for young writers and artists, who came to be known as the Bloomsbury Group. In 1912 she married Leonard Sidney Woolf. Together they founded the Hogarth Press in 1917. Between periods of deep depression Virginia Woolf wrote novels and critical essays. Her first two novels, The Voyage Out, in 1915, and Night and Day, in 1919, were traditional in form. In her later novels, such as Mrs. Dalloway, in 1925, and To the Lighthouse, in 1927, she developed a characteristic style and experimented with various methods of representing the unspoken thoughts and feelings of her characters. The Waves was published in 1931. Many of Virginia Woolf’s critical essays were first published in the Times Literary Supplement. Two collections, The Common Reader and The Common Reader, Second Series, were published during her lifetime. How Should One Read a Book? is from the second series. On March 28, 1941, Virginia Woolf drowned herself in a river near the Woolfs’ wartime home in Sussex. The Bloomsbury Group was made up of young British intellectuals. The members prized wit and good manners and were strongly opposed to the utilitarianism which their Victorian parents had valued. They attached considerable importance to a delicate appreciation of art. Many contemporary writers were critical of the group’s aristocratic attitudes. D.H.Lawrence, for example, described the members as “beetles that sting like scorpions.” But they also had many staunch defenders, including T.S.Eliot. In her essays, Virginia Woolf appears to be addressing a larger Bloomsbury. She speaks to us as intellectual equals who share her passion for books and who are, or want to be, “creative readers” like herself. The following essay, as noted above, is taken from The Com mon Reader, Second Series. The title comes from Samuel Johnson’s Life of Gray. “I rejoice to concur with the common reader,” says Dr. Johnson, “for by the common sense of readers…must be generally decided all claim to poetical honours.” Some critics have suggested that Mrs. Woolf’s ideal reader is far from common. In a sense, this is true. She was herself an omnivorous and demanding reader, devouring and digesting hundreds of books, and bringing to the art of reading an uncommonly acute mind. But she was always concerned to discover and state those elements of the art which good readers have in common. In this sense, her essays are true to the title. And it is in this sense that the essay reprinted here must be understood. She begins by pointing out that there can be no hard and fast rules for reading, but she quickly goes on to say that liberty must not be interpreted as license. If reading is an art, it has principles. These are of particular importance, she suggests, in an age in which there are many books. You cannot read everything. What should you read? Like many of the authors in this volume, she concludes that only the best books should be read. But how are we to discover them? One way is to write, she says. “Perhaps the quickest way to understand the elements of what a novelist is doing is not to read, but to write.” Only then can you discover how difficult, and how magical, good writing is. It follows, too, that “you must be capable not only of great finesse of perception, but of great boldness of imagination if you are going to make use of all that the novelist—the great artist—gives.” Reading is not a passive activity. One cannot do it, as it were, lying down. It is work. It is rewarding. Nothing, Mrs. Woolf suggests, is more so. From novels we learn what it means to “be wrenched and uprooted.” A great novel creates the world anew for a good reader. Biographies people the familiar world with characters who are more interesting than most of the people we know. When we read poetry, “our being for the moment is centred and constricted, as in any violent shock of personal emotion.” Books, for the good reader, have a tremendous effect. But, Mrs. Woolf says, “the first process, to receive impressions with the utmost understanding, is only half the process of reading; it must be completed, if we are to get the whole pleasure from the book, by another. We must pass judgment upon these multitudinous impressions.” In other words, the good reader is a critic, too. His standards, she insists, must be very high. These two points make the heart of the essay. The good reader must receive everything which the book gives him, and he must judge its worth. If he fails to do either—particularly, if he judges without first understanding—he has failed to do his best. The punishment is harsh and automatic. The bad reader is lost among good books. He lacks the highest pleasure available to man, according to Mrs. Woolf. If she is right, none but a fool would refuse to learn to read as well as he can.