Author: William James William James was born in New York City on January 11, 1842. His father, Henry James, Sr., was heir to a fortune which made him independent and enabled him to live as a student and a man of the world. There were five children, the future novelist Henry James being the second. Despite its size, the James family was constantly traveling. As a result the children received their early education mostly from schools and private tutors in England, France, Switzerland, and Germany. William James was slow in discovering his vocation. He studied painting with Hunt in Newport, attended the scientific school and then medical school at Harvard, accompanied the Agassiz expedition to Brazil, and pursued the study of psychology in Germany, before he became, in 1872, instructor of anatomy and physiology at Harvard. Two years later he began teaching psychology and set up the first laboratory in America in experimental psychology. From then until he completed his Principles of Psychology his energies were mainly devoted to this subject. Yet James had always been interested in the problems of philosophy. From 1890, when his great work on psychology was first published, until his death he devoted himself almost entirely to philosophy. Besides his teaching at Harvard, where he was appointed professor of philosophy, he gave many lectures and became a highly popular speaker, in demand from coast to coast. The first volume of his lectures appeared in 1897 under the title of The Will to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy. In 1901–02 he delivered the Gifford Lectures on natural religion at the University of Edinburgh; these were published as The Varieties of Religious Experience. He developed his own philosophy of pragmatism in a book of that title published in 1907 and met the criticism of it in The Meaning of Truth (1909) and A Pluralistic Universe (1909). These works are written in a nontechnical and vigorous style. He was engaged in giving a more technical analysis and expression to his philosophy when he died, August 26, 1910. The three essays presented here were first given as lectures. In them James gives an analysis and defense of individualism. The essay On a Certain Blindness in Human Beings he describes as “providing the perception on which my whole individualistic philosophy is based.” He takes the position that each individual is of unique value and the source of what he calls “vital significance.” Realization of this can lead to great personal joy and exhilaration. James gives high praise to the essay by Stevenson entitled The Lantern-Bearers, which expresses this insight. If the individual is a source of unique value, it becomes a central problem of education to find ways of recognizing and releasing the energies of the individual. This is the main topic considered in The Energies of Men. Convinced that most men use only a small part of their powers, James asks how they may be brought to the top of their abilities. Among the “energy-releasing” agents, he considers the excitement of the unusual stimulus, the example of others or rivalry with them, the demands of duty, or the challenge of a new task. He notes that ascetic exercises aimed at disciplining the will may serve the same purpose, as may also the opposition of new and different ideas. James constantly opposes anything that prevents the appreciation of individual worth. The opinion that man is merely the creature of his environment is, to James, among the worst offenders in this respect. In Great Men and Their Environment he attacks this opinion as it is expressed in what is known as Social Darwinism. James maintains that this is a wholly erroneous and misleading extension of the Darwinian theory of evolution. In these essays James does more than merely pose the problem of individualism. He also explores some of its more important possibilities and does this in a way that merits comparison with such a classic statement as that of John Stuart Mill in his essay On Liberty.