continue..
bent her steps to the castle wall. The wall was very ruinous, and mended with timber, so she climbed the fence, and went her way till she found herself between wall and moat. Gazing below, she saw that the fosse was very deep and perilous, and the maid had great fear. “Ah, God,” cried she, “sweet Creature, should I fall, my neck must be broken; and if I stay, tomorrow shall I be taken, and men will burn my body in a fire. Yet were it better to die, now, in this place, than to be made a show to-morrow in the market.” She crossed her brow, and let herself slide down into the moat, and when she reached the bottom, her fair feet and pretty hands, which had never learned that they could be hurt, were so bruised and wounded that the blood came from them in places a many; yet knew she neither ill nor dolour because of the mightiness of her fear. But if with pain she had entered in, still more it cost her to issue forth. She called to mind that it were death to tarry, and by chance found there a stake of sharpened wood, which those within the keep had flung forth in their defence of the tower. With this she cut herself a foothold, one step above the other, till with extreme labour she climbed forth from the moat. Now the forest lay but the distance of two bolts from a crossbow, and ran some thirty leagues in length and breadth; moreover, within were many wild beasts and serpents. She feared these greatly, lest they should do her a mischief; but presently she remembered that should men lay hands upon her, they would lead her back to the city to burn her at the fire. Now is sung: Poem ```Nicolette the fair, the fond, Climbed the fosse and won beyond; There she kneeled her, and implored Very help of Christ the Lord. “Father, King of majesty, Where to turn I know not, I. So, within the woodland gloom Wolf and boar and lion roam, Fearful things, with rav’ning maw, Rending tusk and tooth and claw. Yet, if all adread I stay, Men will come at break of day, Treat me to their heart’s desire, Burn my body in the fire. But by God’s dear majesty Such a death I will not die; Since I die, ah, better then Trust the boar than trust to men. Since all’s evil, men and beast, Choose I the least.”``` Now they say and tell and relate: Nicolette made great sorrow in such manner as you have heard. She commended herself to God’s keeping, and fared on until she entered the forest. She kept upon the fringes of the woodland, for dread of the wild beasts and reptiles; she hid herself within some thick bush, sleep overtook her, and she slept fast until six hours of the morn, when shepherds and herdsmen came from the city to lead their flocks to pasture between the wood and the river. The shepherds sat by a clear, sweet spring, which bubbled forth on the outskirts of the greenwood, and spreading a cloak upon the grass, set bread thereon. Whilst they ate together, Nicolette awoke at the song of the birds and the laughter, and hastened to the well. “Fair children,” said she, “God have you in His keeping.” “God bless you also,” answered one who was more fluent of tongue than his companions. “Fair child,” said she, “do you know Aucassin, the son of Count Garin of this realm?” “Yes, we know him well.” “So God keep you, pretty boy,” said she, “as you tell him that within this wood there is a fair quarry for his hunting; and if he may take her he would not part with one of her members for a hundred golden marks, nor for five hundred, nay, nor for aught that man can give.” Then looking upon her steadfastly, their hearts were troubled, the maid was so beautiful. “Will I tell him?” cried he who was readier of word than his companions. “Woe to him who speaks of it ever, or tells Aucassin what you say. You speak not truth but faery, for in all this forest there is no beast—neither stag, nor lion, nor boar—one of whose legs would be worth two pence, or three at the very best, and you talk of five hundred marks of gold. Woe betide him who believes your story, or shall spread it abroad. You are a fay, and no fit company for such as us, so pass upon your road.” “Ah, fair child,” answered she, “yet you will do as I pray. For this beast is the only medicine that may heal Aucassin of his hurt. And I have here five sous in my purse, take them, and give him my message. For within three days must he hunt this chase, and if within three days he find not the quarry, never may he cure him of his wound.” “By my faith,” said he, “we will take the money, and if he comes this way we will give him your message, but certainly we will not go and look for him.” “As God pleases,” answered she. So she bade farewell to the shepherds, and went her way. Now is sung: Poem ```Nicolette as you heard tell Bade the shepherd lads farewell, Through deep woodlands warily Fared she ’neath the leafy tree; Till the grass-grown way she trod Brought her to a forest road, Whence, like fingers on a hand, Forked sev’n paths throughout the land. There she called to heart her love, There bethought her she would prove Whether true her lover’s vows. Plucked she then young sapling boughs, Grasses, leaves that branches yield, Oak shoots, lilies of the field; Built a lodge with frond and flow’r, Fairest mason, fairest bow’r! Swore then by the truth of God Should her lover come that road, Nor for love of her who made Dream a little in its shade, ’Spite his oath no true love, he, Nor fond heart, she.``` Now they say and tell and relate: Nicolette builded the lodge, as you have heard; very pretty it was and very dainty, and well furnished, both outside and in, with a tapestry of flowers and of leaves. Then she withdrew herself a little way from the bower, and hid within a thicket to spy what Aucassin would do. And the cry and the haro went through all the realm that Nicolette was lost. Some had it that she had stolen away, and others that Count Garin had done her to death. Whoever had joy thereof, Aucassin had little pleasure. His father, Count Garin, brought him out of his prison, and sent letters to the lords and ladies of those parts bidding them to a very rich feast, so that Aucassin, his son, might cease to dote. When the feast was at its merriest, Aucassin leaned against the musicians’ gallery, sad and all discomforted. No laugh had he for any jest, since she, whom most he loved, was not amongst the ladies set in hall. A certain knight marked his grief, and coming presently to him, said— “Aucassin, of such fever as yours I, too, have been sick. I can give you good counsel, if you are willing to listen.” “Sir knight,” said Aucassin, “great thanks; good counsel, above all things, I would hear.” “Get to horse,” said he; “take your pleasure in the woodland, amongst flowers and bracken, and the songs of the birds. Perchance, who knows? you may hear some word of which you will be glad.” “Sir knight,” answered Aucassin, “great thanks; this I will do.” He left the hall privily, and went downstairs to the stable where was his horse. He caused the charger to be saddled and bridled, then put foot in stirrup, mounted, and left the castle, riding till he entered the forest, and so by adventure came upon the well whereby the shepherd lads were sitting, and it was then about three hours after noon. They had spread a cloak upon the grass, and were eating their bread, with great mirth and jollity. Now is sung: Poem ```Round about the well were set Martin, Robin, Esmeret; Jolly shepherds, gaily met, Frulin, Jack and Aubriet. Laughed the one, “God keep in ward Aucassin, our brave young lord. Keep besides the damsel fair, Blue of eye and gold of hair, Gave us wherewithal to buy Cate and sheath knife presently, Horn and quarterstaff and fruit, Shepherd’s pipe and country flute; God make him well.”``` Now they say and tell and relate: When Aucassin marked the song of the herd-boys he called to heart Nicolette, his very sweet friend, whom he held so dear. He thought she must have passed that way, so he struck his horse with the spurs and came quickly to the shepherds. “Fair children, God keep you.” “God bless you,” replied