Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne Hawthorne’s sketch of Lincoln is one of the most famous face-to-face impressions of the President ever written. It described Lincoln as he appeared in 1862, a year after he took office. At this time he was not generally popular nor even well known. He had been elected to the presidency in what Hawthorne called a “jumble of human vicissitudes.” He had won the Republican nomination in 1860, though Seward had been expected to be named, and he had won the presidential election because the vote was split among four candidates. After a year in office, the war, which Lincoln had reluctantly declared against his countrymen, had gone steadily against the North. Lincoln had not yet been able to unify the command of the armed forces, nor find good generals. But he had suspended constitutional rights, established conscription, and levied huge sums to carry on the war. Such things, though unavoidable, did not tend to make Lincoln popular. What Hawthorne would say about Lincoln, however, depended not only on the existing situation but upon Hawthorne’s appraisal—his vision and faith. How would the fastidious scholar and novelist, representing the oldest and proudest cultural tradition of New England, size up the ungainly backwoods lawyer who had been catapulted into the highest office in the land? Lincoln was “the homeliest man I ever saw,” Hawthorne wrote. “The whole physiognomy is as coarse a one as you would meet anywhere….” His manners were uncouth, his clothes a little disreputable, and his innumerable yarns and anecdotes smacked of “frontier freedom.” He was clearly lacking in refinement and “bookish cultivation.” On the other hand, he possessed a natural dignity, kindness, subtlety, and an unpretentious wisdom. And, in short, Hawthorne would as soon have “Uncle Abe for a ruler” as any man in the country. Even his backwoods faults were piquant and exciting. Hawthorne could not have known, at this time, that some of Lincoln’s speeches would be rated as the best in the English language. He missed many points of his greatness. Yet his estimate of the President was as glowing and affirmative as that of Walt Whitman, who wrote after Lincoln’s death. One thing that Hawthorne loved in Lincoln was his basic humility and humanity. What he disliked most in human beings, as his novels and tales show, was pride and pretense. A year after writing the sketch of Lincoln, Hawthorne insisted on standing by his friend, Franklin Pierce, then regarded as a traitor to the North. He knew he would lose friends and money by it but nevertheless insisted. Yet he does not want to be regarded as a hero or martyr. “I always measure out my heroism very accurately according to the exigencies of the occasion,” he wrote, “and should be the last man in the world to throw away a bit of it needlessly.” It was a similar ironic humor, and dislike of pretense, that Hawthorne saw in Lincoln.