Author: William Kingdon Clifford In free societies, it is commonly held that a man has the right to believe anything he wants, no matter how foolish those beliefs may be. It is only if he is led by his beliefs to act in an undesirable manner that society can interfere. Even then, society cannot force him to change his beliefs—it can only hinder him from acting upon them. Thus, a man is at perfect liberty to believe that women are not intelligent enough to vote, but he must not attempt to prevent any of them from going to the polls. In The Ethics of Belief, W.K.Clifford argues that a man does not have the right to believe anything he wants. On the contrary, he has the right to believe only those things that he has carefully investigated, and for which he has found ample evidence. Says Clifford, “It is wrong always, everywhere, and for anyone, to believe anything upon insufficient evidence.” Men must recognize that they have a duty to examine all of their beliefs and to reject those for which they cannot find adequate support. Society cannot force them to do this, however. They must become aware of it as a moral obligation. Clifford attacks the assumption that beliefs can be kept separate from actions. Though a particular foolish belief may not have any immediate results, each belief, “however trifling and fragmentary it may seem…prepares us to receive more of its like, confirms those which resembled it before, and weakens others; and so gradually it lays a stealthy train in our inmost thoughts, which may someday explode into overt action.” Once he has established that there is a “duty of inquiry,” Clifford goes on to consider some of the important questions which arise when the process of inquiry has begun. How much should we depend on the authority of others? How can we determine who is an authority? Is tradition reliable? How far can we extend inferences from our own experience? Clifford’s essay recalls a famous passage in Plato’s Meno in which Socrates distinguishes between right opinion and knowledge. The man who has right opinion knows what is true but cannot give any reasons for it. The man who has knowledge not only knows what is true but can say why it is true. For Socrates it makes no difference whether actions are based upon right opinion or knowledge. The results will be the same. But for Clifford the difference is crucial. He insists that each man has a responsibility to make sure; that his actions are based upon knowledge and not upon what Socrates calls right opinion. The life of the man who will not accept that responsibility is “one long sin against mankind.”