Author: Arthur Schopenhauer The controversy over education is almost as ancient as philosophy itself. It begins with Plato and Aristotle. Plato’s most famous dialogue, The Republic, is in large part an attempt to outline an ideal educational program. Book VIII of Aristotle’s Politics is a criticism of Plato’s program and a presentation of Aristotle’s own plan for education. From this beginning, the debate on education continues throughout the history of philosophy. It eventually involves (among many others) Montaigne, Descartes, Rousseau, Kant, Schopenhauer, and John Dewey. Though the education controversy is centuries old, it has never before raged so fiercely as it has in the United States in the twentieth century. During this period, we have witnessed clashes between progressivists and classicists, between those who favor courses in social adjustment and those who think that all such courses should be eliminated, between those who think that children should learn “at their own pace” and those who want children to be “challenged,” between those who favor indoctrination and those who think that children should be given complete intellectual freedom, and so on. A listing of all of the various grounds of dispute would require several pages. Are Schopenhauer’s views on education relevant to any of these controversies? Indeed they are, but partisans of either “traditional” or “modern” education will be disappointed to find that he cannot definitely be aligned on either side of the argument. When he says that “the branches of knowledge which are to be studied at any period of life should be such as the mind is equal to at that period and can perfectly understand,” he might appear to be on the side of the modernist. But when he insists that “the memory should be specially taxed in youth,” he approaches the traditionalist side. Schopenhauer’s main concern is that the method of education should be as natural as possible. In other words, the advance of education should be from the observation of particular facts to the formulation of general principles—not vice versa. If general principles are taught first, says Schopenhauer, they soon become preju dices which hinder the individual from seeing the world as it really is. When this occurs (and according to Schopenhauer, it usually does), the individual often must spend most of his adult life un learning his childhood prejudices. Schopenhauer is one of the most independent thinkers who ever lived. He is almost completely free of the illusions that we tend to associate with thought in the nineteenth century. Reading him today is like reading a contemporary. In fact, in parts of his essay On Education, Schopenhauer seems to be in advance of contemporary thinkers.