Author: Michael Faraday The Royal Institution in London, of which Michael Faraday was the director for more than forty years, was not a school. It was supported by endowments and was a pure research establishment. But there were paying members who were allowed to come to the lectures given by associates of the Institution. The audience of these lectures consisted at first only of adults. But Faraday liked to talk to young people about scientific subjects, and he knew that young people liked to hear him. In December, 1826, he began a series of lectures for the sons and daughters of members of the Institution. These became known as the Christmas Lectures, since they were given during the Christmas holidays. The Christmas Lectures were highly successful from the very beginning. In all, Faraday gave them nineteen times, choosing as his subject matter, on different occasions, aspects of chemistry, electricity and magnetism, gravitation, the various forces of nature, and other scientific fields. In December, 1860, Faraday gave the last of his Christmas Lectures. The title was The Chemical History of a Candle. Faraday did not write down his lectures. We owe our knowledge of them to a young scientist named William Crookes, who had a stenographer take down a complete word-for-word record. Crookes published the lectures, and it is this version that we reprint here. In his introduction, Crookes bemoaned “the impossibility, alas! of conveying the manner as well as the matter of the Lecturer.” Faraday was sixty-nine years old when he gave the lectures on The Chemical History of a Candle, but he was still alert and as enthusiastic about science as he ever had been. His slender fingers handled the pieces of equipment with the same wonderful skill for which he was famous throughout the scientific world. What we have here in print is perhaps a pale copy of the reality. It would have been a fine thing to be one of those young people in the great lecture hall of the Royal Institution, listening to its celebrated director talking about candles, light, and the beauty of scientific truth. Yet it may be that some of the magic of that occasion comes through in the printed text. At least, generations of readers have found it to be so. “You have the glittering beauty of gold and silver,” says Faraday, “and the still higher lustre of jewels, like the ruby and diamond; but none of these rival the brilliancy and beauty of flame.” Perhaps the greatest scientist who ever lived was that forgotten Stone Age man who discovered fire. He gave mankind something to use and to worship. In our enlightened age we still maintain some “sacred” flames to remind us how much we owe to fire. Fire is sacred not only because it gives us power to control nature. Fire, a flame, is also symbolical of understanding; it gives light. Faraday, in these lectures, sees not only the pure light of the candle as beautiful. What the burning candle represents is also beautiful, and he succeeds in making us see this. For “there is not a law under which any part of this universe is governed which does not come into play, and is touched upon in these phenomena” of the candle flame. Everything fits together. The universe is understandable. Facts have meaning; they are not just so many puzzles. It is Faraday’s delight in the scientific laws which he did so much to discover that shines through these pages. The candle flame represents for him even more than the meaningfulness of the physical world. The study of fire shows us the interdependence of all living things. Flame itself has a kind of life; “it breaks out with a power of life which is quite wonderful.” What is more, our breathing is a kind of fire. The air acts upon the blood in our lungs, “producing precisely the same results in kind as we have seen in the case of the candle.” Finally, the product of our breathing is carbonic acid (we call it carbon dioxide); this goes up into the air and “is the very life and support of plants and vegetables that grow upon the surface of the earth.” These in turn produce oxygen, and “so are we made dependent, not merely upon our fellow-creatures, but upon our fellow-existers, all Nature being tied together by the laws that make one part conduce to the good of another.” “Life is a pure flame; we live by an invisible fire within us,” wrote Sir Thomas Browne. Though Sir Thomas was a physician, he lived before the Age of Science, and he probably meant something more mysterious by that famous sentence than Faraday would have liked. Nevertheless, Faraday does seem to be saying that there is something mysterious, as well as beautiful, about a candle flame. “The candle alone shines by itself, and for itself,” he says, and he ends his last lecture by wishing “that you may, in your generation, be fit to compare to a candle; that you may, like it, shine as light to those about you.”