Author: Thomas Jefferson Thomas Jefferson, the son of prosperous landowners, was born in Albemarle County, Virginia, in 1743. After being graduated from the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Jefferson took up the study of law. In 1769 he was elected to the Virginia House of Burgesses, and while there he wrote his Summary View of the Rights of British America and his Reply to Lord North. These exercised such a wide influence that Jefferson was sent to represent Virginia in the Continental Congress. In 1776, after drafting the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson returned to Virginia as a member of its legislature. Later, as its governor, he was determined to revise its laws. He is responsible for the statute on religious liberty which was adopted in 1786, and for revisions of the inheritance laws which broke up the large estates. Jefferson also tried unsuccessfully to abolish slavery, and, with limited success, to institute free public education. In 1783 Jefferson was elected to the United States Congress, where he instituted our present decimal system of currency. Two years later he followed Franklin as ambassador to France, returning in 1789 to serve as Secretary of State in the new government under Washington. Jefferson often found himself in conflict with the Federalist group, led by Hamilton, which favored a stronger central govern- ment, tied to property and financial interests. In 1796 Jefferson became Vice-President under John Adams, and was elected President himself in 1800. During his two terms in office, Jefferson successfully conducted the Tripoli War against the Barbary pirates, negotiated the purchase of the Louisiana Territory from Napoleon, and launched the Lewis and Clark northwest expedition. At the age of sixty-five, Jefferson retired and returned to his home, Monticello, which he had designed himself. For the next few years he devoted himself to his many interests, including farming, invention, music, and philosophical correspondence. But his greatest preoccupation was the building of the University of Virginia, the basic plan of which was his. Jefferson died in 1826 on July 4th, fifty years after the publication of The Declaration of Independence. He wrote his own epitaph. It reads: “Here was buried Thomas Jefferson, author of the Declaration of American Independence, of the statute of Virginia for religious freedom, and father of the University of Virginia.” The form of republicanism and democracy which has developed in the United States probably owes more to the ideas of Jefferson than to those of any other man. He had written in The Declaration of Independence “that all men are created equal,” and that they have unalienable rights to “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.” This was “self-evident,” and not a matter to be debated pro and con. Every man is as good as another, if not a little better, became the American creed. The French aristocrat Tocqueville, in 1835, was dismayed by the degree to which equalitarianism had pervaded American institutions and manners. Like Plato, he feared the rule of ignorance. In Jefferson’s opinion there was absolutely nothing wrong with the people that education would not cure: man is indefinitely perfectible. Popular rule or democracy had been little tried, and was certainly not proved, in 1781, when Jefferson wrote the following essay. Distrust of the people and a trend back to oligarchy or monarchy were found among the greatest leaders, especially Hamilton and his Federalists. They feared the people; Jefferson feared “the selfishness of the leaders independent of the people.” In Virginia they wished to concentrate power in a few hands to meet effectively the British invasion then proceeding; he struggled to preserve the constitution and majority rule, in war as in peace. Otherwise, men who had just escaped from an old tyranny might well be fighting for a new one. The constitution of the state of Virginia was born of inexperience, Jefferson argued, and was full of faults and hazards. A majority of the citizens who are in the militia and pay taxes have no representation in the legislature, and where there is representation, it is often unequal and unjust. The two houses of legislature are chosen by the same electors and represent the same interests, and the executive and judiciary are dependent on them. Instead of a balance of powers, each checking the presumption of the others, the constitution had resulted in an “elective despotism.” Forcefully and wittily, Jefferson argues against the power of the House of Delegates to determine for itself when it has a quorum. Amidst the difficulties occasioned by the invasion, the House might decide to fix the quorum at forty, but if this can be done, it also could be reduced to one. A precedent, though well intentioned, may be perilous. What is needed, Jefferson contends, is a convention to correct and clarify the constitution. The people should not be compelled, when their rights are violated, to either rebel or surrender them. These rights must be unmistakably guaranteed in the constitution. Jefferson’s impressions of his colleagues, Washington and Franklin, speak for themselves. In spite of his shortcomings, Washington looms monumental and serene, and we see Franklin’s charm and persuasiveness peer through his anecdotes.