Author: Sir Francis Galton Francis Galton was born near Birmingham, England, in 1822. He was educated at London and Cambridge; for a time he thought he would be a doctor, but soon decided to devote himself to science. He traveled to Africa and Spain and added to the geographical and anthropological knowledge of those areas. He was made a member of the Royal Society in 1856; the following year he settled in London and began his life’s work on eugenics (a word he invented). He did research also on the weather, inventing the word anticyclone and doing work that led to the modern weather map. He discovered that fingerprints are unique to the person and pointed out their usefulness in the solution of crimes. He developed the composite photograph. In his work on eugenics and human heredity he invented many methods that are now commonplace. Among them were the questionnaire, various apparatus for measuring sensations, and a method of correlating statistical information that is still used. He was the first “anthropometrist”—that is, man-measurer. He did not only measure man. He tried to measure things that no one thought could be measured, and succeeded in many cases. Thus a remarkably large number of branches of modern science stem from him. Hereditary Genius, from which the following selection is taken, was published in 1869. It is his most famous book. Second to it, among many publications, is Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development, which appeared in 1883. He was knighted in 1909, and he died on January 17, 1911. In 1904, he had founded a eugenics laboratory in London and endowed it with forty thousand pounds. Since the support for the thesis of Hereditary Genius is that eminent men tend to be related by blood, it should be noted that Galton was the grandson of the poet-naturalist Erasmus Darwin, and thus the cousin of Charles Darwin. Descendants of the two men are among the leading scientists of our day. I propose to show,” says Galton, “that a man’s natural abilities are derived by inheritance, under exactly the same limitations as are the form and physical features of the whole organic world.” And he concludes: “I feel convinced that no man can achieve a very high reputation without being gifted with very high abilities; and I trust that reason has been given for the belief, that few who possess these very high abilities can fail in achieving eminence.” These statements, and others like them in Galton’s work, helped to generate several hotly argued modern controversies. The first statement raises the question whether abilities are inherited or acquired; whether, that is, it is nature or nurture that determines the intelligence and talents that human beings have. Galton is clearly on the side of nature in this dispute; it is not, therefore, surprising that he has been accused of underestimating the role of environment in individual development. It is equally clear that both sides can be supported by plausible, if not finally convincing, arguments, and the reader might undertake, as an interesting exercise, the refutation of Galton’s position as expressed in the following selection. But he should at the same time recognize that Galton’s arguments are succinct and carefully marshalled. In particular, he should realize that Galton is admitting that circumstances can bring out in ordinary men talents and attributes that would otherwise not be visible. But it is impossible, Galton is also saying, to make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear. The very greatest men of all, he insists, do not, and apparently cannot, spring from absolutely ordinary backgrounds. Another question raised by Galton is whether genius often goes unnoted by the world. He admits that it may sometimes happen that the extremely talented human being fails to achieve eminence. But the poet Gray’s famous dictum—that Poem ```Full many a flower is born to blush unseen, And waste its sweetness on the desert air—``` that would seem to be pretty emphatically denied by Galton. Again, as in the nature-nurture argument, it would be difficult to prove the proposition either way. Galton cannot prove that the highly talented never fail to achieve distinction; on the other hand, it is almost impossible to give convincing examples of persons possessing great talents who failed to achieve it. Though it may be impossible to make a final decision between the two positions, there may be more wisdom in taking Galton’s than its opposite. The idea that genius can exist without recognition is so prone to an obvious kind of abuse—one may, for example, apply it to oneself—that it seems suspect. In the long run it may be more prudent to assume that the world is, after all, the best judge, and if a man does not attain its applause—though this may come after his death—then he never was worthy of it. Other issues are touched upon by Galton’s book. For example, he suggests that the honors examination in mathematics at Cambridge is a pretty fair gauge of abilities of all kinds, not only the mathematical. This assertion, which is also made by some modern framers of tests and examinations, has been hotly disputed—especially by the nonmathematical. But aside from the many controversial positions expressed in the selection, the reader will probably feel that not the least fascinating portions of it deal simply with the achievements of extraordinary human beings.