Author: Lucian The Greek satirist Lucian was born at Samosata in northern Syria. The little we know about him comes mostly from his own writings. He tells how he was briefly apprenticed to an uncle, a sculptor, and one day was beaten for breaking a slab of marble. When he returned home he dreamed of two women—one representing Statuary, the other Literature. Each begged him to follow her, and he chose Literature. After practicing law in Antioch for a time, he journeyed to Macedonia, Greece, Italy, and Gaul, as an itinerant rhetorician and sophist. Back in Athens around 165 a.d., he labored twenty years on his satirical dialogues and composed his best works. Late in his life he accepted a government post in Egypt, a step that took some explaining on his part, for he had previously denounced those who hire out their talents. Lucian is credited with some eighty works, including dialogues, such as Sale of Lives and Dialogues of the Dead, and the Olympian fables, which ridicule the pretentious and absurdity of philosophers of the time. In The True History he parodies adventure stories. He also wrote romances and autobiographies. Of special interest are his references to the sincerity of the Christians and to that “great man” who was crucified in Palestine. Some of the writings which go under the name of Lucian are of doubtful authenticity. His dialogues, however, his literary criticism, and such romances as The True History are undoubtedly his. They are a model of satirical style and are generally admired. It is easy to see why Gibbon was so fond of them, and how The True History could have been the inspiration of Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels. Lucian has been described as a sophist, a skeptic, and a blasphemer. The Greek sophists were accused of “making the worse appear the better cause.” Whether Lucian was a sophist in this sense would depend on your point of view—on which cause you regard as “the better.” He certainly attacked cherished popular beliefs and customs relentlessly. His ideal was to show no mercy for shams, and to tell the truth always, and laughingly. The Way to Write History opens with an account of an imaginary epidemic at Abdera, where the inhabitants had been infected with a melodramatic fever after watching a famous tragic actor. Another absurd epidemic has hit the educated class of his day, Lucian says—the fever to become a historian. These would-be historians have taken it upon themselves to imitate the classic style of Thucydides and Herodotus. They seek in this way to gain some credit for their inaccurate and garbled versions of Roman history. The examples he gives of their fatuous pretentious and stupidity—their bombast and self-seeking flattery—serve as amusing warnings of how history should not be written. Some think they have done a good job if they praise the “right” side or the “right” men, but history has no favorites. These writers confuse history with panegyric, Lucian says, and probably he would say the same of some of our present-day historians. Nothing excuses inaccuracy, Lucian says, neither the pretext of entertaining the reader, nor the desire for poetic beauty. When poetry is confused with history, the result “is nothing but poetry without the wings.” Nothing can replace facts, and “facts are not to be collected at haphazard, but with careful, laborious, repeated investigation.” On the other hand, the facts are not to be recorded indiscriminately. Too much detail is wearisome and pointless. A selection must be made, but does Lucian give us a principle of selection? How are we to distinguish the essential facts from the incidental? Lucian seems to say that no one can tell you in advance what facts will be the important ones. What is required is “political insight” and this is “a gift of nature, which can never be learned.” You will have to decide for yourself how far this is true. The other main trait required by the historian—a good style—can be acquired, according to Lucian, by a loving study of the classics and diligent practice. Is a lucid, forceful style, then, within reach of everyone? Courage, as would be expected, is a third essential of the historian. Thucydides is Lucian’s ideal historian, and he draws many lessons from The Peloponnesian War. It was Thucydides who drew the critical line between the bad and the good historian. Whereas the former makes “a bid for present reputation,” the latter seeks to make his work “a possession forever,” and to be of service to mankind if history should repeat itself. The issues are clearly drawn, and such questions as these confront us: Are good histories permanent, or do they have to be rewritten by later centuries in the light of new knowledge? And how far does history repeat itself, providing lessons for succeeding generations?