Author: Karl von Clausewitz Karl von Clausewitz, army general and theorist of war, was among the Prussian military figures—including General Gerhard von Scharnhorst (1755–1813) and Field Marshal Count Neithardt von Gneisenau (1760–1831)—who during the wars against Napoleon organized a military system for their country that strongly influenced its national character. They were inspired to do this by the Battle of Jena (1806), where Napoleon destroyed the Prussian forces, which, since Frederick the Great (1712–1786), had been thought to be the finest in the world. That disaster showed the superiority of an inspired national army over professional legions of the sort created by Frederick. The lesson taught Prussia—and Europe—the effectiveness of a kind of war that was later to be called total. Clausewitz himself, who was only thirty-five when Napoleon at last surrendered, missed the chance to achieve first distinction as a field officer. Yet his career began so early that he rose to higher rank than most men of his age. He was born near Magdeburg, Saxony, of parents too poor to educate their children. At twelve he entered the army. By the time he was fourteen, he was a veteran who had received a commission. He was captured by the French at Prenzlau. Subsequently, he returned to Prussia to help Scharnhorst re-establish the army, went afterward with many of his fellow officers to help the Russians resist and defeat Napoleon’s invasion of 1812, and was chief of staff to one of the Prussian generals at the Battle of Waterloo (1815). Meanwhile he had managed to educate himself. His talents as a theorist of military affairs were recognized before he was twenty-five. During interludes of peace he served as an administrator and teacher of military organization. When the long war with France was finished he became director, in 1818, of the Prussian Allgemeine Kriegsschule (War College), where he carried on the work that Scharnhorst had begun. In 1830 he was transferred to active duty near the Polish border, becoming chief of staff to Gneisenau, with whom he had served in Russia. He died at Breslau the next year of cholera, a disease which in the same year also killed his commander. Clausewitz’ writings were collected and published after his death. Besides lives of Scharnhorst and Gneisenau, they include histories of the Napoleonic campaigns and studies of various military leaders. But the work for which their author has become famous is the treatise Vom Kriege (On War). The selection that follows is the first chapter of that work. What is war? It is a kind of duel, Clausewitz says, in which the aim is to disarm your enemy so that you may impose your will upon him. It is not, in other words, a polite exercise of the sort sometimes undertaken by eighteenth-century kings and generals. In theory, war is without limits, save for those “restrictions, hardly worth mentioning, which it imposes on itself under the name of international law and usage.” In practice, however, Clausewitz suggests, war is limited by political considerations. War as he conceives it is really a means to the political objects of competing states, and from these objects it cannot, or should not, be separated. The implication is that in time of war a well-ordered state and its army are the same thing, while even in time of peace the proper national spirit is a militant one. Such reflections have often been opposed in two different ways. In the first place, with respect to Clausewitz’ book as a whole, it can be said—as Homer seems to and as Tolstoy certainly does say—that war is not a philosophical subject. War cannot be reduced to a system of which there can be a science. Even if it is admitted that war can be systematized, it must also be said that it is not civilized. War, as such, is not a legitimate social enterprise. It can be maintained, as Virgil seems to do, that war constitutes a failure of civilization rather than a practice of it. It has been doubted whether any national object exists, apart from survival, which war can justifiably serve. One might hesitate to admit that such a thing as war can be “a real political instrument, a continuation of political intercourse, a carrying out of the same by other means.” Those who oppose Clausewitz’ view on these or other grounds cannot deny his fierce realism. “War is an act of force,” he says, “and to the application of that force there is no limit.” These words were written to refute certain eighteenth-century theorists who considered war a game—“a sort of algebra of action,” as Clausewitz scornfully puts it. War in itself has no intrinsic restraints. Clausewitz did not fear an unlimited war, since he supposed that extrinsic political objectives would always exist to limit it. But it is the opinion of some modern writers that war has become unrestrainable. We may wonder whether Clausewitz would maintain that any political objectives whatever could limit a conflict between two opponents armed with nuclear weapons.