Author: H.L.F. von Helmholtz Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz was born at Potsdam, Germany, in 1821. He studied at Berlin and held various professorships at Potsdam, Königsberg (in physiology), Bonn (in anatomy and physiology), Heidelberg (in physiology), and Berlin (in physics). He was named director of the Physicotechnical Institute at Charlottenburg, near Berlin, 1887, and held this position as well as his Berlin professorship until his death. Helmholtz did work in most areas of nineteenth-century science. In this respect, he was remarkable even in an age when many scientists ranged much more widely in their researches than they now do. His most important early paper was on the conservation of energy; the essay that follows is a popular exposition of some of the conclusions described therein. In 1851 he invented the ophthalmoscope, and with it investigated the mechanism of sight. He collected his researches in a book, Physiological Optics (1856–66), which was the most important work on the physics of vision to have appeared until that time. He then turned his attention to acoustics. He explained the mechanism of the ear and attempted to account for our sensations of tone. He showed that these depend on the order, number and intensity of the overtones, or harmonics, which constitute a part of the structure of musical notes. His book The Sensations of Tone (1862) is said to be the principia of physiological acoustics. In his later years, Helmholtz did work on the conservation of energy, hydrodynamics, electrodynamics, meteorology, optics, and the abstract principles of dynamics. He also wrote and lectured on philosophical and aesthetic problems. He died on September 8, 1894. The mathematician W.K.Clifford paid tribute to Helmholtz for his remarkable ability to make important contributions in fields far removed from that of his own special competence. Helmholtz was, Clifford wrote, “the physiologist who learned physics for the sake of his physiology, and mathematics for the sake of his physics, and is now in the first rank of all three.” The title of the following very famous essay is a little misleading. Helmholtz is here not writing primarily of force but of energy, or work. Work is the product of a force times the distance over which the force acts. The modern term for this quantity is kinetic energy, and the modern title of the essay would be “The Conservation of Energy.” “The total quantity of all the forces capable of work in the whole universe remains eternal and unchanged throughout all their changes,” writes Helmholtz. This is the famous law of the conservation of energy, the so-called first law of thermodynamics. The relation of this law to the second law of thermodynamics, and entropy, is discussed in The Running-down of the Universe, by A.S.Eddington. Helmholtz’ researches into the nature of energy conversion were of prime importance. When he was a young doctor, the prevailing biological theory was vitalism. Helmholtz came to the conclusion that vitalism must violate natural laws, because the vital force did not require any energy, and its operation seemed to him to imply perpetual motion. He decided that the question consisted in whether the force—the sum of the mechanical energy plus heat—produced by an organism was or was not solely the result of the digestion of foods by the organism. He concluded that the question must be answered in the affirmative. He collected his researches in the early paper, On the Conservation of Force (1847), which is the source of the following essay. Helmholtz’ work was not entirely original. Eighteenth-century physicists such as Bernoulli, Euler, d’Alembert, and La Grange had extended the principle of the conservation of energy from simple machines to the actions of all mechanical systems in the universe. Helmholtz gives credit to Rumford and Davy, and especially to Robert Mayer and Joule, for their extension of it to living beings. But Helmholtz’ paper had a great influence. After its publication, the principle gained wider and wider acceptance. In particular, it went far toward convincing physicists that perpetual motion was impossible. And the popular essays which Helmholtz subsequently wrote on this subject helped laymen and scientists alike to understand the change to the new mechanical theory of heat from the older caloric theory—the idea that heat was a substance. This change in theories is discussed by Einstein and Infeld in “The Rise and Decline of Classical Physics.” Max Planck in his Scientific Autobiography recalled that Helmholtz was a disappointing classroom lecturer. To others, however, and later even to Planck, who became his colleague at Berlin, he was a superior teacher. And Helmholtz took seriously the task of interpreting science to the general public, for he was disturbed by the split, which has perhaps grown even wider since his time, between scientists and what are now called humanists. He was a clear and patient writer, and he searched his mind for interesting and illuminating examples which would be meaningful to his readers. These virtues, which are by no means shared by all writers of popular scientific exposition, are much in evidence in the following selection.