Author: Cornelius Tacitus Tacitus (his given name may have been Publius or Gaius) was probably of noble Roman blood. Much of what little we can find out about him is in his own works and the letters of his friend, the Younger Pliny. “I know that your Histories will be immortal,” said Pliny. They are. Nine emperors, Nero among them, governed or misgoverned Rome in his lifetime. Three of these—Vespasian, Titus, Domitian—lifted Tacitus rank by rank in the public service. Fame touched him early, as an orator. He married the daughter of Julius Agricola. In a.d. 79 or 80, Agricola became the first general to put all Britain under Roman control. His name was loud in the city. Domitian feared him as a rival. Agricola died “in the prime of a vigorous manhood,” probably poisoned. Tacitus composed a burning memorial to his father-in-law (see below). Much earlier, he had published the Dialogue on Orators. Four years away from Rome may have given him the source for his Germania. This brings us our fullest early news of the Germans, as Agricola does of the Britons. Under the insane terror of Domitian’s last years, Tacitus was forced to look on at the imperial murder of friends and fellow officials. It marked his mind with blackness and shadowed his two major works. Of these, the Histories laid down events from a.d. 69 to 97; the Annals traced out the disorders of Rome from Tiberius to Nero’s end in 68. These were written under the new “liberal” emperors, Nerva and Trajan. In a.d. 97 Tacitus became a consul or chief magistrate. With his friend Pliny he convicted Marius Priscus, a notorious African governor accused of crimes against his subjects. An inscription found in the twentieth century names Tacitus as proconsul of Asia Minor about 112. After that we hear no more of him. Suppose you were a member of the Supreme Soviet under Joseph Stalin, dictator of Russia between 1927 and 1953. Day after day, during the state trials of the 1930’s, you watched the old Bolsheviks, men whom you had lived and worked with, stand up and confess treason against the state. You yourself were forced to praise the dictator. You approved the death sentence. And all the while you knew that these acts of treason were unbelievable. You knew these men. They could never have betrayed their party and their country. It was a lie. Stalin feared them. He had ordered their destruction; and the whole engine of the state, even the accused themselves, moved to give a color of justice to what was in fact persecution and madness. Then Stalin was dead, and after a while it became possible to tell at least some part of the truth. How would you feel? That is how Tacitus must have felt when the emperor Domitian was finally murdered. And what would you do? We know what Tacitus did. He set out to write the life story of one of Domitian’s victims, an honorable man well known to him, his father-in-law and his friend. He called it The Life of Gnaeus Julius Agricola. He meant to make Agricola’s name stand for all those other men of principle destroyed by the tyrant. Moreover, since Agricola had been a great Roman general, Tacitus would be writing history, too. History, he said, could do nothing better than “to let no worthy action be uncommemorated,” to condemn “evil words and deeds” in the eyes of later ages. His book would become in some measure a hymn of praise to a good soldier. He would, in fact, make Agricola a kind of ideal West Pointer. He would tell how he went to school at soldiering under Suetonius Paulinus in Britain; how “he would learn from the skillful, and keep pace with the bravest, would attempt nothing for display, would avoid nothing from fear.” He would mention Agricola’s term as governor of Asia, where he had to deal with a swindling proconsul, and his service in Aquitania. Then he would bring him back to Britain and show his talent as a soldier rising gradually to its crest at the battle of Mons Graupius. He would describe how Agricola returned to Rome, his prudent behavior in the face of great popularity, and his mysterious death. Tacitus’ geography might be shaky, and the speeches he gave to his characters were certainly made up; but he would be careful to set down only such matters as he believed to be fact, even as to the lack of evidence that Agricola had been poisoned. Like his contemporary Plutarch, Tacitus was more a student of man than a historian; and in an age “so cruel, so hostile to all virtue,” he was more moralist than either. What we have called the great ideas were well known to him. He lived by them. History? It was his trade. Tyranny? Who knew it better than Tacitus? War and peace? He could hardly tell one from another in his time. Plainly he belonged to an aristocracy, the Roman senatorial class. More often than not, this was also an oligarchy—a rule by the prosperous few. Like the best men of his class, he lived according to the principles of courage and honor. And virtue? He gave us proof of this in the great speech which ends his Agricola. Meant as praise of Agricola, it is also his own confession. See, he says, our shame. In the madness of Domitian, we were faced with a moral conflict we could not solve: a conflict between loyalty to the empire and loyalty to a class, to justice, to truth itself. We could not act, and because of this the best men in Rome died.