Author: Andrew Russell Forsyth Every now and then a mathematician is called upon to justify his craft to nonmathematicians. The occasion may be an address delivered before some learned body (learned in other fields), or it may be an informal after-dinner conversation. In either case the usual approach is to show how useful mathematics is. Too often, however, this consists essentially in pointing out that everyone needs to do sums at some time in his life. It remains for the gifted teacher to try to define what he considers to be the mathematical way of thinking, and to describe precisely the nature of the relationship between mathematics and the other sciences. Forsyth was such a teacher. Andrew Russell Forsyth, Scottish mathematician, was born in Glasgow in 1858. After studying at University College in Liverpool and at Trinity College in Cambridge, he became a professor of mathematics, lecturing at Trinity College, Cambridge, and at the Imperial College of Science and Technology in London. He was a creative mathematician in the field of pure mathematics, and wrote widely on the subject of differential equations. In addition to his own contributions to mathematics, Forsyth stimulated interest in the work of other mathematicians. He died in 1942. Mathematics, in Life and Thought, delivered as a lecture in 1928, is an example of Forsyth’s ability to excite interest in a subject usually regarded with either awe or dislike. Much of it is devoted to a description of the mental processes which led Newton from the observation of the falling apple to the theory of universal gravitation. Though such a description in nonmathematical terms requires considerable simplification, it is an interesting account of the facts then available to Newton, and the puzzles that he had to solve in order to arrive at his theory. In placing Newton’s work in its historical context as the culmination of investigations by Copernicus, Galileo, and Kepler, and followed by radical modifications by Einstein, Forsyth illustrates the nonstatic nature of scientific theory. The last word is never said. After mentioning the many areas in which mathematics serves in the market place, Forsyth makes a special plea for mathematics as a pure science. In many cases scientific theories can come into being only because the forms in which they can be expressed have been created by mathematicians years or even centuries before anyone foresaw their possible usefulness.