continue..
altars, and in the crypts beneath the churches; those who go in worn old mantles and old tattered habits; who are naked, and barefoot, and full of sores; who are dying of hunger and of thirst, of cold and of wretchedness. Such as these enter in Paradise, and with them have I nought to do. But in Hell will I go. For to Hell go the fair clerks and the fair knights who are slain in the tourney and the great wars, and the stout archer and the loyal man. With them will I go. And there go the fair and courteous ladies who have friends, two or three, together with their wedded lords. And there pass the gold and the silver, the ermine and all rich furs, harpers and minstrels, and the happy of the world. With these will I go, so only that I have Nicolette, my very sweet friend, by my side.” “Truly,” cried the Viscount, “you talk idly, for never shall you see her more; yea, and if perchance you spoke together, and your father heard thereof, he would burn both me and her in one fire, and yourself might well have every fear.” “This lies heavy upon me,” answered Aucassin. Thus he parted from the Viscount making great sorrow. Now is sung: Poem ```Aucassin departed thus Sad at heart and dolorous; Gone is she his fairest friend, None may comfort give or mend, None by counsel make good end. To the palace turned he home, Climbed the stair, and sought his room. In the chamber all alone Bitterly he made his moan, Presently began to weep For the love he might not keep. “Nicolette, so gent, so sweet, Fair the faring of thy feet, Fair thy laughter, sweet thy speech, Fair our playing each with each, Fair thy clasping, fair thy kiss, Yet it endeth all in this. Since from me my love is ta’en I misdoubt that I am slain; Sister, sweet friend.”``` Now they say and tell and relate: Whilst Aucassin was in the chamber lamenting Nicolette, his friend, the Count Bougars of Valence, wishful to end the war, pressed on his quarrel, and setting his pikemen and horsemen in array, drew near the castle to take it by storm. Then the cry arose, and the tumult; and the knights and the men-at-arms took their weapons, and hastened to the gates and the walls to defend the castle, and the burgesses climbed to the battlements, flinging quarrels and sharpened darts upon the foe. Whilst the siege was so loud and perilous the Count Garin of Beaucaire sought the chamber where Aucassin lay mourning, assotted upon Nicolette, his very sweet friend, whom he loved so well. “Ha, son,” cried he, “craven art thou and shamed, that seest thy best and fairest castle so hardly beset. Know well that if thou lose it thou art a naked man. Son, arm thyself lightly, mount to horse, keep thy land, aid thy men, hurtle into the press. Thou needest not to strike another, neither to be smitten down, but if they see thee amongst them, the better will they defend their goods and their bodies, thy land and mine. And thou art so stout and strong that very easily thou canst do this thing, as is but right.” “Father,” answered Aucassin, “what sayest thou now? May God give me nought that I require of Him if I become knight, or mount to horse, or thrust into the press to strike knight or be smitten down, save only thou givest me Nicolette, my sweet friend, whom I love so well.” “Son,” replied the father, “this can never be. Rather will I suffer to lose my heritage, and go bare of all, than that thou shouldest have her, either as woman or as dame.” So he turned without farewell. But when Aucassin saw him part he stayed him, saying— “Father, come now, I will make a true bargain with thee.” “What bargain, fair son?” “I will arm me, and thrust into the press on such bargain as this, that if God bring me again safe and sound, thou wilt let me look on Nicolette, my sweet friend, so long that I may have with her two words or three, and kiss her one only time.” “I pledge my word to this,” said the father. Of this covenant had Aucassin much joy. Now is sung: Poem ```Aucassin the more was fain Of the kiss he sought to gain, Rather than his coffers hold A hundred thousand marks of gold. At the call his squire drew near, Armed him fast in battle gear; Shirt and hauberk donned the lad, Laced the helmet on his head, Girt his golden-hilted sword, Came the war-horse at his word, Gripped the buckler and the lance, At the stirrups cast a glance; Then most brave from plume to heel Pricked the charger with the steel, Called to mind his absent dear, Passed the gateway without fear Straight to the fight.``` Now they say and tell and relate: Aucassin was armed and horsed as you have heard. God! how bravely showed the shield about his neck, the helmet on his head, and the fringes of the baldric upon his left thigh. The lad was tall and strong, slender and comely to look upon, and the steed he bestrode was great and speedy, and fiercely had he charged clear of the gate. Now think not that he sought spoil of oxen and cattle, nor to smite others and himself escape. Nay, but of all this he took no heed. Another was with him, and he thought so dearly upon Nicolette, his fair friend, that the reins fell from his hand, and he struck never a blow. Then the charger, yet smarting from the spur, bore him into the battle, amidst the thickest of the foe, so that hands were laid upon him from every side, and he was made prisoner. Thus they spoiled him of shield and lance, and forthwith led him from the field a captive, questioning amongst themselves by what death he should be slain. When Aucassin marked their words, “Ha, God,” cried he, “sweet Creature, these are my mortal foes who lead me captive, and who soon will strike off my head; and when my head is smitten, never again may I have fair speech with Nicolette, my sweet friend, whom I hold so dear. Yet have I a good sword, and my horse is yet unblown. Now if I defend me not for her sake, may God keep her never, should she love me still.” The varlet was hardy and stout, and the charger he bestrode was right fierce. He plucked forth his sword, and smote suddenly on the right hand and on the left, cutting sheer through nasal and headpiece, gauntlet and arm, making such ruin around him as the wild boar deals when brought to bay by hounds in the wood; until he had struck down ten knights, and hurt seven more, and won clear of the melée, and rode back at utmost speed, sword in his hand. The Count Bougars of Valence heard tell that his men were about to hang Aucassin, his foe, in shameful wise, so he hastened to the sight, and Aucassin passed him not by. His sword was yet in hand, and he struck the Count so fiercely upon the helm, that the headpiece was cleft and shattered upon the head. So bewildered was he by the stroke that he tumbled to the ground, and Aucassin stretched forth his hand, and took him, and led him captive by the nasal of the helmet, and delivered him to his father. “Father,” said Aucassin, “behold the foe who wrought such war and mischief upon you! Twenty years hath this war endured, and none was there to bring it to an end.” “Fair son,” replied his father, “better are such deeds as these than foolish dreams.” “Father,” returned Aucassin, “preach me no preachings; but carry out our bargain.” “Ha, what bargain, fair son?” “How now, father, hast thou returned from the market? By my head, I will remember, whosoever may forget; so close is it to my heart. Didst thou not bargain with me when I armed me and fared into the press, that if God brought me again safe e and sound, thou wouldst grant me sight of Nicolette, my sweet friend, so long that I might have with her two words or three, and kiss her once? Such was the bargain, so be thou honest dealer.” “I,” cried the father, “God aid me never should I keep such terms. Were she here I would set her in the flames, and thou thyself might well have every fear.” “Is this the very end?” said Aucassin. “So help me God,” said his father; “yea.” “Certes,” said Aucassin, “grey hairs go ill with a lying tongue.” “Count of Valence,” said Aucassin, “thou art my prisoner?” “Sire,” answered the Count, “it is