Author: Friedrich Wohler Friedrich Wöhler was born near Frankfurt am Main, Germany, in 1800. He studied at Heidelberg, where he worked in Gmelin’s laboratory. Gmelin told him that he need not attend the chemistry lectures, as they would be, for him, a waste of time. He took a degree in medicine but was persuaded to devote himself to chemistry. He studied in Sweden and taught at Berlin and Cassel; in 1836 he was appointed professor of chemistry at Göttingen, in which position he remained until his death. He made Göttingen famous for its department of chemistry, and many prominent chemists were trained by him. Wöhler’s greatest single contribution to the science of chemistry was the synthesis of urea, his paper on which follows. This important work was done when he was only twenty-eight. He also, in company with the chemist Justus von Liebig, laid the foundations of organic chemistry—the chemistry of carbon compounds. He isolated, analyzed and studied many elements and compounds, the most notable among them being perhaps aluminum. His studies touched upon practically every known element. In his youth, chemistry was an open field of endeavor. Because of his work and that of others, the science of chemistry was divided into various special fields of investigation; now no man can do the kind of wide-ranging experimentation that Wöhler so much enjoyed. Wöhler published more than 300 papers and memoirs on chemical subjects. He received many honors. He died in Göttingen on September 23, 1882. Research gave the unexpected result,” Wöhler writes, “that by the combination of cyanic acid with ammonia, urea is formed, a fact that is noteworthy since it furnishes an example of the artificial production of an organic, indeed a so-called animal substance, from inorganic materials.” The fact was indeed noteworthy. For with these few lines, and the short paper that supported them, a new epoch in thought was inaugurated. If an organic substance could be made in the laboratory out of inorganic materials, where was the essential dividing line between life and non-life? Aristotle held that living things acted in a different way from non-living ones. Each living thing had a principle of life, an entelechy, which naturally defined its form and function. This view was not seriously disputed until the seventeenth century, when Descartes suggested that animals, if not men, were machines subject to the basic mechanical laws that governed all natural things, living or non-living. Descartes’ idea was not a popular one. The theory of “vitalism” countered it. To vitalists, the word “machine” expressed exactly what the animal body was not. Living organisms were not governed by physical and chemical laws, but by laws of a completely different kind. Wöhler’s three pages delivered an exacting challenge to vitalism. Wöhler does not mention vitalism. Humbly, in true scientific fashion, he refrains “from the considerations which so naturally offer themselves as a consequence of these facts.” He notes, however, with wonderful diffidence, that “from further experiments on these and similar cases, a general law might be deduced.” He did not have to plunge into the controversy which continues to our day. He knew what he had done, and he knew also that other men would not refrain from consideration of the consequences of it. What is life? Is there something mysteriously different about it, or is the difference between living and non-living things merely a matter, as some modern scientists say, of the relative size of molecules? An answer to this question—one which is completely satisfactory to everybody—may never be forthcoming. But the answer, whatever its form, will have to take into account this paper of Wöhler’s, written by a twenty-eight-year-old chemist who did not have to attend class because he already knew so much.