Author: William Hazlitt Like any other good writer, Hazlitt often tells us things we know but did not know we knew. His On the Feeling of Immortality in Youth provides some excellent examples. We are all young or have been. Thus we are all capable of judging the truth of the feelings he describes, though perhaps in different and limited ways. Hazlitt’s subject is not youth in itself but youth in the light of its opposite age, and seen from that viewpoint. Youth, as he says, can hardly imagine age; and age, though it has its own youth to remember, will more often than not gild that youth out of all resemblance to itself. Hazlitt begins with an aphorism of his brother’s: “No young man believes he shall ever die.” Though we think of exceptions at once—Keats dying of tuberculosis, a young infantryman who has done too much fighting—we are struck with its general truth of feeling. We see how it makes a keynote for the whole essay. Moreover, we are reminded of that saying of Marlow’s, in Conrad’s Youth, that he had felt as if he “could last for ever, outlast the sea, the earth, and all men….” It is the same feeling. “Youth” is an abstract noun; “being young” is the thing itself. Conrad creates a sequence of events that will symbolize this feeling; Hazlitt generalizes, but so warmly that he too manages to give us the sense of the thing itself. And how well he does it, with what a wealth of example! In youth, he says, “we are rocked in the cradle of our desires, and hushed into fancied security by the roar of the universe around us,” so that we have “no room for the thoughts of death.” Death—and how truly that poet’s phrase catches the feeling—is no more than a “dim shadow lingering for us in the distance.” We are alive and young. That is enough for us. To be young is to be the citizen of a universal and immortal country, in which every man in his youth—everyone who has ever been young or will be—is our contemporary. For the romantic, and Hazlitt was that, the rest of life is a long exile from that country. Hazlitt was well acquainted with the Elizabethans, and there is a touch of Elizabethan eagerness and splendor about the passage that begins: “To see the golden sun….” It turns dark as it confronts the paradox of death in the midst of this brightness. He tells us about his own youth, how it caught fire in the ardor of the French Revolution, the common hope of liberty for all men. But when that hope “set once more in the night of despotism,” he felt that his youth was ended and turned back to the past. If we are young, or if we remember our own early years with some exactness, we may perhaps feel that Hazlitt idealizes youth a little. Did he forget its troubles? Did he forget that to be young is often to be anxious, to be confused about which way we are going, to attempt things we do not quite understand, things we are not quite sure we can do? Did he forget that when we are young the world is very big and very strong, that it is sometimes hostile or indifferent to the best and truest of our wishes?