continue..
he who was readier of tongue than his fellows. “Fair children,” said he, “tell over again the song that you told but now.” “We will not tell it,” answered he who was more fluent of speech than the others; “sorrow be his who sings it to you, fair sir.” “Fair children,” returned Aucassin, “do you not know me?” “Oh yes, we know well that you are Aucassin, our young lord; but we are not your men; we belong to the Count.” “Fair children, sing me the song once more, I pray you!” “By the Wounded Heart, what fine words! Why should I sing for you, if I have no wish to do so? Why, the richest man in all the land—saving the presence of Count Garin—would not dare to drive my sheep and oxen and cows from out his wheatfield or his pasture, for fear of losing his eyes. Wherefore, then, should I sing for you, if I have no wish to do so?” “God keep you, fair children; yet you will do this thing for me. Take these ten sous that I have here in my purse.” “Sire, we will take the money; but I will not sing for you, since I have sworn not to do so; but I will tell it in plain prose, if such be your pleasure.” “As God pleases,” answered Aucassin; “better the tale in prose than no story at all.” “Sire, we were in this glade between six and nine of the morn, and were breaking our bread by the well, just as we are doing now, when a girl came by, the loveliest thing in all the world, so fair that we thought her a fay, and she brimmed our wood with light. She gave us money, and made a bargain with us that if you came here we would tell you that you must hunt in this forest, for in it is such a quarry that if you may take her you would not part with one of her members for five hundred silver marks, nor for aught that man can give. For in the quest is so sweet a salve that if you take her you shall be cured of your wound; and within three days must the chase be taken, for if she be not found by then, never will you see her more. Now go to your hunting if you will, and if you will not, let it go, for truly have I carried out my bargain with her.” “Fair children,” cried Aucassin, “enough have you spoken, and may God set me on her track.” Now is sung: Poem ```Aucassin’s fond heart was moved When this hidden word he proved Sent him by the maid he loved. Straight his charger he bestrode, Bade farewell, and swiftly rode Deep within the forest dim, Saying o’er and o’er to him: “Nicolette, so sweet, so good, ’Tis for you I search this wood; Antlered stag nor boar I chase, Hot I follow on your trace. Slender shape and deep, blue eyes, Dainty laughter, low replies, Fledge the arrow in my heart. Ah, to find you, ne’er to part! Pray God give so fair an end, Sister, sweet friend.``` Now they say and tell and relate: Aucassin rode through the wood in search of Nicolette, and the charger went right speedily. Do not think that the spines and thorns were pitiful to him. Truly it was not so; for his raiment was so torn that the least tattered of his garments could scarcely hold to his body, and the blood ran from his arms and legs and flanks in forty places, or at least in thirty, so that you could have followed after him by the blood which he left upon the grass. But he thought so fondly of Nicolette, his sweet friend, that he felt neither ill nor dolour. Thus all day long he searched the forest in this fashion, but might learn no news of her, and when it drew towards dusk he commenced to weep because he had heard nothing. He rode at adventure down an old grass-grown road, and looking before him saw a young man standing, such as I will tell you. Tall he was, and marvellously ugly and hideous. His head was big and blacker than smoked meat; the palm of your hand could easily have gone between his two eyes; he had very large cheeks and a monstrous flat nose with great nostrils; lips redder than uncooked flesh; teeth yellow and foul; he was shod with shoes and gaiters of bull’s hide, bound about the leg with ropes to well above the knee; upon his back was a rough cloak; and he stood leaning on a huge club. Aucassin urged his steed towards him, but was all afeared when he saw him as he was. “Fair brother, God keep you.” “God bless you too,” said he. “As God keeps you, what do you here?” “What is that to you?” said he. “Truly, naught,” answered Aucassin. “I asked with no wish to do you wrong.” “And you, for what cause do you weep?” asked the other, “and make such heavy sorrow? Certainly, were I so rich a man as you are, not the whole world should make me shed a tear.” “Do you know me, then?” said Aucassin. “Yes, well I know you to be Aucassin, the son of the Count, and if you will tell me why you weep, well, then I will tell you what I do here.” “Certes,” said Aucassin, “I will tell you with all my heart. I came this morning to hunt in the forest, and with me a white greyhound, the swiftest in the whole world. I have lost him, and that is why I weep.” “Hear him,” cried he, “by the Sacred Heart, and you make all this lamentation for a filthy dog! Sorrow be his who shall esteem you more. Why, there is not a man of substance in these parts who would not give you ten or fifteen or twenty hounds—if so your father wished—and be right glad to make you the gift. But for my part I have full reason to weep and cry aloud.” “And what is your grief, brother?” “Sire, I will tell you. I was hired by a rich farmer to drive his plough, with a yoke of four oxen. Now three days ago, by great mischance, I lost the best of my bullocks, Roget, the very best ox in the plough. I have been looking for him ever since, and have neither eaten nor drunk for three days, since I dare not go back to the town, because men would put me into prison, as I have no money to pay for my loss. Of all the riches of the world I have nought but the rags upon my back. My poor old mother, too, who had nothing but one worn-out mattress, why, they have taken that from under her, and left her lying on the naked straw. That hurts me more than my own trouble. For money comes and money goes; if I have lost to-day, why, I may win to-morrow; and I will pay for my ox when pay I can. Not for this will I wring my hands. And you—you weep aloud for a filthy cur. Sorrow take him who shall esteem you more.” “Certes, thou art a true comforter, fair brother, and blessed may you be. What is the worth of your bullock?” “Sire, the villein demands twenty sous for his ox. I cannot beat the price down by a single farthing.” “Hold out your hand,” said Aucassin; “take these twenty sous which I have in my purse, and pay for your ox.” “Sire,” answered the hind, “many thanks, and God grant you find that for which you seek.” So they parted from each other, and Aucassin rode upon his way. The night was beautiful and still, and so he fared along the forest path until he came to the seven cross-roads where Nicolette had builded her bower. Very pretty it was, and very dainty, and well furnished both outside and in, ceiling and floor, with arras and carpet of freshly plucked flowers; no sweeter habitation could man desire to see. When Aucassin came upon it he reined back his horse sharply, and the moonbeams fell within the lodge. “Dear God,” cried Aucassin, “here was Nicolette, my sweet friend, and this has she builded with her fair white hands. For the sweetness of the house and for love of her, now will I dismount, and here will I refresh me this night.” He withdrew his foot from the stirrup, and the charger was tall and high. He dreamed so deeply on Nicolette, his very sweet friend, that he fell heavily upon a great stone, and his shoulder came from its socket. He knew himself to be grievously wounded, but he forced himself to do all that he was