Author: Jean De Crèvecouer Born at Caen, Normandy, January 31, 1735, Michel Guillaume Jean de Crèvecoeur (the name in French means “heartbreak”) got his later schooling in England and served four years as an officer and map maker under General Montcalm in Canada. Soon after 1759, when Wolfe broke the French power at Quebec, Crèvecoeur seems to have moved down into the American colonies. He changed his name to J.Hector St. John, became a citizen, and married Mehitable Tippet of Yonkers, New York. They settled on a large farm in Orange County, New York, and had three children. There Crèvecoeur must have written his Letters from an American Farmer. The Revolution brought a day-and-night terror of Indian raids and made enemies of friends and neighbors (the farmer in the book actually decides to take his family and live with friendly Indians). Crèvecoeur was apparently called back to France by his father. He took his eldest son along. They were imprisoned by the British in New York. When they finally sailed, their ship was wrecked off the Irish coast. In London, Crèvecoeur sold his book for thirty guineas (about $153). Quickly it went through eight editions in five countries. It was published in Philadelphia in 1793. He became a celebrated man, admired by Hazlitt, Lamb, and Coleridge, the friend of Franklin, Buffon, and Mme D’Houdetot. Crèvecoeur translated and enlarged his book in French. Back in America as consul to three of the new states in 1784, he found his wife dead and his younger children in the care of Boston friends. He brought the children together in New York, set up a packetship service between France and America, and went back to studying botany. Later he fattened the French Letters into a three-volume work. He was recalled to France in 1790. There he wrote a second three-volume book, this one about his travels in Pennsylvania and New York. Crèvecoeur died in 1813. In the 1920’s, a batch of his unpublished English essays came to light in a French attic. The publication of these, coupled with D.H.Lawrence’s praise of him, revived his reputation. He seems so familiar, such a cheerful, everyday friend, that we can hardly believe he was alive when the United States was born. He reminds us of Jefferson and of Rousseau. They share the tone of the Age of Reason. In this tone, we feel the classical idealism of Greece and Rome, strained through Plutarch. Like Virgil and Horace, Crèvecoeur lived in a time of wars and civil wars. The farm in Orange County, like Horace’s farm in the Sabine Hills, was his moment of paradise. But already there was a strain of the new Romantic century in him. It came out strongly in his views of nature. He was an amateur in that great company of early American naturalists—Audubon, John and William Bartram, Alexander Wilson, Rafinesque—who discovered an earthly heaven in their new country. Thoreau would come after them. As a man of the Age of Reason, Crèvecoeur was also a man of ideas. These come to a kind of focus in his essay “The Making of Americans,” in Letters from an American Farmer. Perhaps he was not the first to ask that question, but he seems to have been the first to make a real try at answering it. He brings an imaginary Englishman to look at us and thereby displays the already broad difference between Englishman and American. We are blended together, Crèvecoeur writes, out of all kinds of Europeans. This is the first we hear of the melting pot. He thinks—and here, perhaps, he was largely mistaken—that religions will combine as nationalities do. “Some few towns excepted,” he says, “we are all tillers of the earth….” So he thinks of Americans, by and large, as farmers, and of labor as a good. He speaks of a man’s liberty and happiness on his own acres; of his love for wife and children, and the domestic virtue that springs from this; of the mild laws and encouraging government that make it possible; of the equality each man feels in rejecting the aristocracy of Europe. He sees the hideous evil and the still unjust gentleness of slavery. He observes the one and the many, and shows us half a dozen typical immigrants. Tocqueville, who visited the United States a generation later, in the 1830’s, gives us a wider and more thoughtful view of democracy’s workings and shows us the American types already in being. What would Crèvecoeur think of us now, in the second half of the twentieth century? We are largely gathered in cities. He felt that our hope lay in freedom on the land. Like so many other eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Americans, he thought of country living as more favorable to virtue. Was he right, then or now? Would he consider our tract houses in the suburbs much the same thing as farmers living on their own land? Would he feel that we have abolished the whole injustice of slavery, or that there is more yet to be done? Would he find reasons for the bigness of our government, the complexity of our techniques, our ambitions on the moon? How would he feel the first time he encountered a parking meter or took off in a jet airplane? Read him, this eighteenth-century American who had such high hopes for us, and see if you can guess whether we would please him or disappoint him.