Author: Claude Bernard Claude Bernard’s early ambitions were as nearly irrelevant to his later career as can be imagined. He was born near Villefranche, France, in 1813. He was first educated by the Jesuits and then proceeded to the college at Lyons, which he soon left to become a druggist’s assistant. But his main effort was devoted to the composition of a musical farce, The Rose of the Rhône, which was produced and created a local stir. Encouraged, he attempted a prose drama in five acts, called Arthur of Britain. Armed with this work, he went, at the age of twenty-one, to Paris, carrying also an introduction to a famous literary critic. The latter convinced Bernard that he should study medicine instead of write plays! Bernard became an interne at the Hôtel-Dieu, worked under the physiologist Magendie, became his deputy, and in 1855 succeeded him as professor of physiology. He was also named the first professor of physiology at the Sorbonne. There was, however, no laboratory in which he could work in the Sorbonne. Bernard acquainted Napoleon III of this deficiency in what must have been eloquent fashion, for the Emperor not only procured for the physiologist a laboratory at the Sorbonne but also built one for him in the Jardin des Plantes, and established a professorship which Bernard accepted in 1868. He was in the same year admitted to the Institut de France. He died in Paris on February 10, 1878, and received a public funeral. He was the first scientist ever to be accorded this honor by France. Bernard’s most important work consisted of three great discoveries. The first involved the pancreas gland, which he proved to be of fundamental importance in digestion. The second involved the liver. He showed that this organ not only produces bile but also, by an “internal secretion,” forms a starchlike substance named by him glycogen, the end product of which is dextrose—sugar. The third series of investigations resulted in the discovery of the so-called vasomotor nerves, which control the blood vessels. Seventeen volumes of Bernard’s lectures were published during his life and after his death. In 1865 he produced the Introduction to Experimental Medicine, from which the following selection is taken. A long commentary would be necessary to present this splendid work to the reader,” wrote Louis Pasteur of Bernard’s Introduction to Experimental Medicine; “It is a monument raised to honor the method which has constituted Physical and Chemical Science since Galileo and Newton, and which M.Bernard is trying to introduce into physiology and pathology. Nothing so complete, so profound, so luminous has ever been written on the true principles of the difficult art of experimentation… This book will exert an immense influence on medical science, its teaching, its progress, its language even.” Concerning the method to which Pasteur refers, Bernard is perfectly clear. It consists in admitting that “the nature or very essence of phenomena, whether vital or mineral, will always remain unknown,” that “we can learn only relations, and phenomena are merely the results of relations,” and that “experience soon teaches us that we cannot get beyond the how” of things, “i.e., beyond the immediate cause or the necessary conditions of phenomena.” The introduction of this method into physiology involves the assertion that “a living organism is nothing but a wonderful machine endowed with the most marvellous properties and set going by means of the most complex and delicate mechanism.” “Living machines are…created and constructed in such a way that, in perfecting themselves, they become freer and freer in the general cosmic environment. But the most absolute determinism still obtains, none the less, in the inner environment which is separated more and more from the outer cosmic environment, by reason of the same organic development.” And “determinism,” according to Bernard, is “the foundation of all scientific progress and criticism.” Pasteur not only recognized the basic purpose of the book; the reader will also discover that his praise of it is merited. Even the selection included below can be said to be “complete,” “profound” and “luminous.” And Pasteur’s predictions as to its effects were also accurate. The work has indeed had a profound influence on medical science. Bernard did much to create biochemistry: the science, that is, which treats—and with what wonderful results we know—the living organism as though it were a machine. It has been claimed that the theory of vitalism had to be laid aside before man could understand life, and Bernard’s work did much to bring about the demise of the old theory. And it is natural that the teaching of medicine should have reflected the progress produced in it by the ideas of Bernard and others. Pasteur was even correct in his prediction that Bernard’s book would exert an influence on the language of medicine. The terms “internal environment” and “external environment” became basic to the science. They reflected the important conception that is close to the heart of Bernard’s idea of living things: that it is impossible, in his words, “to imagine a body wholly isolated in nature; it would no longer be real, because there would be no relation to manifest its existence.” Bernard was not only a great theorist; he was also a skillful experimenter. In another work, he expounds the principles that should underlie all experimentation. “Put off your imagination as you take off your overcoat when you enter the laboratory,” he writes, “but put it on again, as you do the overcoat, when you leave the laboratory. Before the experiment and between whiles let your imagination wrap you around; put it right away from yourself during the experiment itself, lest it hinder your observing power.” This is excellent advice—both parts of it. By the use of his metaphor of the overcoat, Bernard has neatly expressed the necessary interplay between experiment and hypothesis, between deduction and induction, between observation and thought. The student of any science can learn much from the physiologist Claude Bernard.