Author: Henry David Thoreau Henry David Thoreau, the famous poet-naturalist and philosopher, is remembered as much for his life as for his writings. He is the outstanding American example of the individual who is determined to live according to his own lights, no matter how unconventional his life may be. He has become a symbol of rebellion and nonconformity. Thoreau was born in Concord, Massachusetts, on July 12, 1817. As a boy he spent much of his time roaming the outdoors, but there was little else in his early life to suggest his later eccentricity. His career at Harvard College (1833–1837) was an unexceptional one. It was while at Harvard that he first came under the spell of Ralph Waldo Emerson. He was deeply stirred by a reading of Emerson’s Nature, and for many years Emerson was to be the most important intellectual influence in his life. After graduating from college, Thoreau taught school briefly. Then, with his brother, John, he made a boat trip that became the subject of one of his major works, A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers. From 1841 to 1843 he lived with the Emerson family, working as a handy man. It was shortly after leaving the Emerson household that he decided to move to Walden Pond, at that time part of the uninhabited wilds of Massachusetts. Thoreau had several reasons for moving to Walden Pond, but probably of greatest importance was his desire to live as simply as possible. He was convinced that most of the trappings of civilization were unnecessary for human happiness. He thought it was a great mistake for men to spend so much of their time working to obtain things they did not really need. The result was, he said, that “the mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.” He wanted to prove—to himself and to others—that life could be simpler and more joyful. Thoreau lived at Walden Pond for two years, renouncing everything he considered inessential. (“Few lives contain so many renunciations,” said Emerson.) His shelter was a cabin measuring ten feet by fifteen feet that he had built with his own hands. His diet consisted mainly of rice, bread made from rye and Indian meal, potatoes, and wild fruit. Occasionally he ate fish or some salt pork. During the first eight months of his stay, his expenses (including the cost of his cabin) amounted to sixty-two dollars. His account of his experiences at Walden Pond, entitled Walden, is one of the classics of American literature. After the Walden experiment, Thoreau engaged in a variety of activities. He worked as a surveyor, gave lectures, made excursions to Cape Cod and the Maine woods, and wrote essays for periodicals. He also became involved in the abolitionist movement and, during the last years of his life, was greatly distressed by the failure of the United States government to do anything about freeing the slaves. He died early in May, 1862, of tuberculosis. When obedience to the laws of the state requires an individual to act against his conscience, which should he obey—the law or his conscience? One traditional answer to this question is that given by Socrates in the Crito. Socrates says that the individual “must do what his city and country order him; or he must change their view of what is just.” In other words, the individual has the right to persuade the state to change the law, but so long as the law remains unchanged, he must obey it. In Civil Disobedience, Thoreau gives the opposite answer. For him, loyalty of conscience takes precedence over loyalty to the state. If a man’s conscience tells him that a law is unjust, he must oppose the law. But it is not enough merely to express disapproval, or to promise to vote against the law at the next election. The individual should take action to hinder the law’s enforcement. He should refuse to do what the law orders, even if it means imprisonment. Thoreau was convinced that a dedicated minority—even a minority of one—could exert great political influence. “A minority is powerless when it conforms to the majority,” he said, “but it is irresistible when it clogs by its whole weight.” Civil Disobedience is the most widely read and influential of Thoreau’s political essays. Mohandas Gandhi, the great Indian leader, acknowledged his indebtedness to it for many of his ideas concerning nonviolent resistance. It has also played an important role in the attack upon racial segregation in the United States. A Plea for Captain John Brown is, in many respects, a perfect companion piece to Civil Disobedience. Opinions about John Brown vary widely, but for Thoreau he was an extraordinary example of the man of conscience who has devoted his life to the cause of justice—the type of man he had called for in Civil Disobedience. Thoreau had been impressed with John Brown ever since their first meeting in 1857, and his Plea was inspired by Brown’s arrest at Harpers Ferry, Virginia, in 1859. The Harpers Ferry incident was only one part of John Brown’s lifelong fight against slavery. He and his five sons had been active in the struggle to determine whether Kansas would be a free state or a slave state. He had personally ordered the murder of five proslavery settlers in retaliation for the killing of five free-state settlers. He remained in Kansas until 1859, when he began working on a scheme to establish a refuge for fugitive slaves in the mountains of Virginia. The attack upon Harpers Ferry was part of this scheme. The attack failed, and Brown and his associates were captured, convicted of treason, and hanged. In the eyes of the abolitionists (including Thoreau) Brown was a martyr; southerners thought him a madman and a scoundrel. The full truth about John Brown will probably never be known, but Thoreau’s Plea is a moving testament to the force of his personality.