Author: Sir James Jeans James Hopwood Jeans was born in London on September 11, 1877. He studied at Cambridge; he was second wrangler in 1898. The reader of Galton’s Hereditary Genius will realize that the last fact not only meant that Jeans had extraordinary intellectual gifts but that his career in the academic world was practically assured. Jeans became a lecturer in applied mathematics at Cambridge, was later a professor of the same subject at Princeton University, in New Jersey, and still later a professor of astronomy at the Royal Institution. His early studies were in the area of energy and radiation, but he made elegant contributions to astronomical theory, and it is as an astronomer that he is best known. He constructed mathematical models of the actions and interactions of astronomical bodies; in the course of this work he proved that Laplace’s theory of the origin of the solar system was impossible. Jeans conceived several original cosmogonies—theories, that is, of how the universe came into existence. And he wrote a number of widely read books for the laymen on this and other aspects of science and astronomy. Among these the best known is perhaps The Universe Around Us, which appeared in 1929, and from which the following selection is taken. We reprint here the last chapter of the book. Jeans was knighted in 1928 and was awarded the Order of Merit in 1939. He died on September 17, 1946. The reader who compares the foregoing biographical note with that of A.S.Eddington will not fail to see the very many similarities between the two men. Jeans was five years older; he was second rather than senior wrangler; and he died two years later. But both men won the Smith Prize at Cambridge, a great honor; both were Cambridge teachers; both were astronomers; both were knighted; both were O.M.’s; and both were successful scientific popularizers. More significantly for our purposes, perhaps, is that both, in the selections which appear in these volumes, concern themselves with the beginning and end of the universe. And it is notable that in some respects they have the same things to say. For example, in such a discussion it is now customary to mention entropy and the second law of thermodynamics, and both men do so. As to the question whether the universe will rejuvenate itself after its inevitable running down, both seem to agree that rebirth is not desirable, even if it is possible. And both emphasize the vastness of the time, space and radiation scales by which astronomers measure the world in which we live. But at this point an important difference may seem to appear between them. Where Eddington refuses to speculate, or does so unwillingly, Jeans leaps in. His qualifications for doing so should not be questioned. He was a great mathematical astronomer, and he probably knew as much about the fate of the universe as anybody. But he is in the following selection not speaking of that fate from a strictly mathematical point of view. What strikes him about the immense amount of time that stretches before the earth is the opportunities it affords for the amelioration of man’s condition. “Looked at in terms of time,” he writes, “the message of astronomy…becomes one of almost endless possibility and hope.” Eddington had apparently seen no such thing, in a book written only a year before. There is about Eddington’s statements a kind of stoic resignation. Jeans is not resigned at all. “We have come into being in the fresh glory of the dawn,” he says, “and a day of almost unthinkable length stretches before us with unimaginable opportunities for accomplish- ment.” All the problems of living will be possible of solution in this vast time, he seems to be implying, and life will have a meaning and, one supposes, a beauty that are practically inconceivable to the “dim heroic figures” of today. It should be noted that Jeans, though he is by comparison with Eddington of a highly optimistic temperament, is not entirely optimistic. “We may perhaps be glad,” he writes, “that our lives have fallen in the beginning, rather than at the end, of this great stretch of time. We may well imagine that if man survives to the end of it, he will have infinitely more knowledge than now, but one thing he will no longer know—the thrill of pleasure of the pioneer who opens up new realms of knowledge.” For him, the thrill is in the pursuit of knowledge, not in its possession.