Author: Henri Poincaré Jules Henri Poincaré, the son of a physician, and a cousin of the President of France during World War I, was born at Nancy, France, in 1854. He studied at the École Polytechnique and at the School of Mines. After receiving a degree in mathematical sciences in 1879 from the University of Paris, he lectured for two years at Caen. He became maître de conférence in mathematical analysis at the University of Paris in 1881, and in 1886 he was promoted to professor of mathematical physics and the calculus of probabilities. Henri Poincaré, the greatest mathematician of his time, conformed to the popular idea of a mathematical genius. Timid, frail, and precocious, he spent his childhood in a scholarly household that was frequented by philosophers and scientists. He early displayed a remarkable mathematical aptitude, but he drew geometrical diagrams so badly that he failed the drawing test in the entrance examinations for the École Polytechnique. In maturity, he was short, stooped, near-sighted, and absent-minded. Although he claimed that his memory was not good enough to make him a good chess player, it was fabulous in matters of great complexity. His contribution to scientific writing is enormous. He wrote more than thirty books on mathematical physics and astronomy, nearly five hundred memoirs on mathematics, two books of popular essays, and three books on the philosophy of science. His work falls into three main divisions: pure mathematics, astronomy, and physics. His most important work is in pure analytical mathematics. Poincaré won many honors and prizes and was elected to membership in the most distinguished scientific bodies, being appointed to the Academy of Science at the early age of thirty-two. The literary quality of his popular and philosophical essays was recognized by the French Academy. Because of the breadth of his mathematical knowledge he has been called the “last universalist.” He died at Paris on July 17, 1912. Among the great creative mathematicians, Poincaré is noted for his philosophical breadth and lucid style. In Science and Hypothesis and Science and Method, from which the present selections are taken, the most technical and difficult topics are brought within the reach of the intelligent nonmathematical reader—or almost. Poincaré’s intuitive power was immense. His insights, you will find, come fast and thick, and it would be ungrateful to complain if you do not understand every one. If your rich uncle writes you a check for an amount greater than you can handle at the moment, you simply put the balance aside for another day. The first two selections present Poincaré’s original ideas about the relation of geometry, on the one hand, and physical space and physics, on the other. It had been noted for centuries that Euclid’s fifth axiom was not self-evident and could not be proved. This was regarded as an unfortunate flaw, but it led in the nineteenth century to a very important generalization of geometry. Bolyai, Lobachevski, and Riemann developed non-Euclidian geometry, of which Euclidian geometry proved to be a limiting case. In Lobachevski’s geometry, the sum of the angles of a triangle was less than two right angles, in Riemann’s the sum was greater. In Euclidian geometry the sum was equal to two right angles, which is a limiting case of “greater than” and “less than” two right angles—one possibility in an infinity of possibilities. The starting point of this great generalization of geometry, however, was Euclid’s axiom of parallels, which states, in effect, that through a given point only one line can be drawn parallel to a line on the same plane. Riemannian geometry said none, and Lobachevskian geometry said an infinite number. These three geometries, then, were very different. Many theorems which held for one would not hold for the others; yet there were common theorems, too. For example, “the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal” and “two lines which are parallel to a third are parallel to each other” are common to both the Lobachevskian and the Euclidian geometries. On the other hand, “the area of a circle is πr” is valid only in one geometry—the Euclidian. But how can these new geometries be true if the Euclidian geometry is? How can they be self-consistent? They are consistent if there is no contradiction among their theorems. But since all the infinity of possible theorems have not been deduced, how do we know that some contradiction will not turn up in the future? Poincaré points out that since a limiting case of both the Lobachevskian and the Riemannian geometries is equivalent to a branch of ordinary Euclidian geometry, neither can be regarded as inconsistent—unless Euclid is also inconsistent! The same conclusion is reached by the dictionary of terms given on pp. 268–269, whereby Lobachevskian theorems can be translated into Euclidian theorems. The question which of the geometries is true still impends. Poincaré’s answer was that “one geometry can not be more true than another; it can only be more convenient.” The most convenient is the Euclidian: it is simplest in itself, in the sense that plane trigonometry is simpler than spherical trigonometry, and it also accords best with the properties of the physical objects that we see, handle, and measure. Little need be said of the second and third selections. They speak for themselves and almost read themselves. One thing that may occur to you in reading the chapter on mathematical discovery, though Poincaré does not spell it out, is that the creative mind is not one that simply has more new and important ideas. It is a mind that simply has more ideas and works faster in eliminating the uninteresting ones. Secondly, the new ideas would never be discovered if the mathematician were not always looking for “elegant” short cuts—shorter proofs and simplifications. A good memory is necessary, of course, and also careful analysis which clarifies the problem. The originality of Poincaré’s theory of discovery is the role which he assigns to the unconscious, and the interplay between conscious and “unconscious work.” The solution to a problem may come suddenly, after the mathematician has given up hope and has turned to altogether unrelated activities. You will see how Poincaré explains what seems to be a “sudden illumination” that comes to the mathematician when he has forgotten all about the problem and is thinking of other things. You might consider an additional explanation. Could it be that when the mathematician or we ourselves are trying to solve a problem, certain inhibitions develop which block the door to the correct answer, and that while engaging in other activities these inhibitions are relaxed? This would be what the psychologists call “disinhibition.” Poincaré was close to the spirit and all the developments of physical science of his time. He was too close to interpret “chance” as sheer absence of a cause. What evidence is there that things occur without a cause? And that what has a cause can always, in principle, be predicted? Nor could he be attracted by the view of some of the Enlightenment philosophers that all events—however trifling—have a cause, chance events being merely those whose causes we do not yet know. The latter view is unsatisfactory. Chance is not the realm of ignorance. The motion of the molecules of a gas is random and fortuitous, yet we can predict what they are going to do en masse when the gas is heated. We can determine precisely the pressure which they will exert. Similarly, the actuarian cannot know what individuals will die next year, but he can predict how many will. It is not out of ignorance that insurance companies make money. Statistical laws are of course exceedingly important in science. The question that has come before the stagelights since Poincaré wrote is whether the final form of scientific laws is to be statistical or causal. Poincaré apparently looked forward to the possibility of advancing beyond statistical laws to causal laws relating to the particles or individuals. But this was before the development of the quantum theory and recent theories of the structure of the atom. As a result of these developments, some of the greatest authorities believe that there is real indeterminacy in nature and that basic laws must remain statistical. What Poincaré would say if he were alive today is an interesting speculation.