Author: Abraham Lincoln Nothing in Abraham Lincoln’s early life was designed to make him the great figure that he became. His father, Thomas, was a wandering homesteader, and Lincoln’s family roved through three states in his early years, from Kentucky, where Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809, to Indiana and to Illinois. During those years Lincoln farmed, chopped trees, operated a flatboat on the Ohio River, and worked as a clerk in a store at New Salem, Illinois. In 1832, during the Black Hawk War against the Indians, Lincoln signed up in the local militia and was elected captain by the men of his company. At twenty-three he was already recognized as a natural leader. During his early political career Lincoln was encouraged to study for the law. He did so on his own, as he said, never “in a college or an academy as a student.” In 1836 he received a license to practice and soon established his office in Springfield, Illinois, where he met and married Mary Todd, the future mother of his four sons. Lincoln first won national prominence when he campaigned against Stephen A.Douglas for the United States Senate. A series of debates with Douglas did not win him the election but brought him to the attention of the country. In the 1860 Republican National Convention Lincoln was nominated for President and won the national election. By the time Lincoln was inaugurated some southern states had already seceded from the Union. The country was soon plunged into civil war, and Lincoln was faced with the exhausting duties of a wartime President. He was re-elected in 1864, when the end of the war was in view and the task of reconstruction loomed ahead. Unfortunately, Lincoln never lived to see the country through that difficult period. He was shot by the actor John Wilkes Booth on April 14, 1865, only five days after the end of the war, and died on the following morning. As the funeral train carried his body back to Springfield, thousands mourned the man who had served them through their great crisis. Abraham Lincoln’s speeches and writings were designed to clarify and direct the events of his period. Some of his speeches, such as the Gettysburg Address, are unexcelled in precision and power. It is more than likely that he could have been a great creative writer. He had no formal education, but the books he read as a boy had the happiest of influences upon him—such books as the Bible, Pilgrims Progress, Robinson Crusoe, and Aesop’s Fables. His later readings in history and law, and his study of Euclid’s Elements and of English grammar served to point and polish his prose style. His writings have the pungency of the fables, the precision of mathematics, and the splendid resonance of the Bible. With one exception all of the selections here are addressed to the public. The exception is a brief note found in his papers—the “Meditation on the Divine Will.” It is interesting because in this private speculation Lincoln echoes a note which runs through many of his important speeches. It is the thought that God must have willed this contest where each side believed itself to be in the right. He adds despairingly: “Yet the contest proceeds.” Lincoln’s first speech in the East was made on February 27 at Cooper Institute in New York, shortly before he was nominated for the Presidency. Here he is the sharp-witted, hard-hitting lawyer, flaying the Democrats and defending the Republican policy of restricting the institution of slavery. Ridiculing the stand taken by proslavery Democrats, he says that they are “for the ‘gur-reat pur-rinciple’ that ‘if one man would enslave another, no third man should object,’ fantastically called ‘Popular Sovereignty.’” He points out that the United States Constitution, which southerners invoke, gives them no right to take slaves to free territories, and he shows that Jefferson regarded slavery as an evil, to be eventually eradicated. “Let us have faith that right makes might,” he says in closing, “and…dare to do our duty.” On March 4, 1861, when Lincoln took the oath of office, southern states were already seceding from the Union. In his First Inaugural Address, Lincoln takes a humane and conciliatory point of view, argues the irrationality of war, and pleads for “a patient confidence in the ultimate justice of the people.” This is more than the lawyer speaking; this is the man who has just taken on an appalling responsibility and is making a last effort to stave off the impending disaster. In the deceptively simple Gettysburg Address of November 19, 1863, Lincoln states the ideal of government to which he rededicates the forces of the Union—so “that these dead shall not have died in vain.” The re-establishment of the Union and the restoration of peace was always foremost in his mind. In his Second Inaugural Address, of March 4, 1865, even before the end of the war, he urged the people, while prosecuting the war to its end, to have “malice toward none,” and “charity for all.” The letter to Horace Greeley of August 22, 1862, shows Lincoln in the unenviable role of conciliating the radical and the moderate elements of his government. In his last, prophetic address, which urged an understanding of the defeated South, he shows the strain of his prolonged debate with those who might still destroy the Union. Here the man who was nicknamed “Father Abraham” pleads for his recalcitrant children: “Finding themselves safely at home,” he says, “it would be utterly immaterial whether they had ever been abroad.” It is little wonder that the admiration of Lincoln has become a cement binding all sections of the Union, which he did so much to preserve.