Author: Walt Whitman This lecture on Lincoln was first given fifteen years after the assassination of the sixteenth President. The popularity of Abraham Lincoln had risen to the highest pinnacle. What words could Whitman find in any way worthy of the Great Emancipator? Would not any praise or tribute, so close to the unbelievable tragedy, sound paltry and insincere? In Whitman’s case there was a special difficulty. He had no use for histories which see the meaning of events “in single eminent persons,” and was impatient with Carlyle’s Cromwell and with hero worship in general. Speaking of the Civil War heroes, including Lincoln, he warned against giving undue weight to personalities. It is easy to exaggerate the role of saviors and “exceptional men.” The real heroes of the Civil War in Whitman’s poetry were the rank and file soldiers and the embattled people. His Leaves of Grass began with: One’s-self I sing, a simple separate person, Yet utter the word Democratic, the word En-Masse. Whitman was no hero-worshiper; he was the apostle of the average man, or of every man. The sum of all known reverence I add up to you, whoever you are. How then can Whitman give the greatest hero in American history his due? There is no use trying to anticipate too closely what your reaction to this speech will be, but one or two general impressions may help you to form yours. We are given only one close-up picture of Lincoln; it is imposing but also touching. We see him in 1861, just before he took office—a tall, ungainly figure, stretching his long limbs with composure as he faced the curious gaze of thirty or forty thousand men, unknown to him, and stared back with equal curiosity. They wanted to see the man who had been placed in command, and would take on his shoulders the vast impending conflict. And when they had seen him, they went quietly away. The story of the murder of the President is told with moving and vivid simplicity—as if by an eyewitness. We also see the tragedy in the perspective of other great martyrs. The course of history had been altered when Socrates was given the hemlock and when Caesar was cut down in the Senate House. The death of Lincoln had already left its mark on America, consecrating and strengthening the Union so dearly paid for in blood and sacrifice. Yet throughout Whitman’s speech we hear little of Lincoln’s wisdom, courage, magnanimity, shrewdness, humor, and humanity. His great personal gifts and achievements are scarcely mentioned, never praised. Whitman’s theme seems rather to be the national struggle for the preservation of the Union, a struggle enmeshing the lives of the soldiers in the battlefield, and all the men and women who worked and suffered through the long years at home. The tribute to Lincoln thus tends to become a tribute to the people whom he led to victory. They are the heroes, collectively, and Lincoln is one with them; when they suffer he suffers and their achievement is his achievement. Whitman called himself the poet of democracy. Do you think that in his democratic outlook Lincoln loses something of greatness and appeal? Is there perhaps a gain in realism and conviction?