Author: Norman Robert Campbell Norman Robert Campbell was a British physicist and philosopher of science. Born in 1880, he was educated at Eton and at Trinity College, Cambridge. While his researches in physics were highly regarded by his fellow-specialists, he is best known to the general public for his skill in popularizing science. For many years he gave freely of his time to adult education groups. Always clear and original, he had the ability to provoke thoughtful consideration of basic ideas. When he died in 1949 he had published nine books and some eighty-nine research papers. The selections below are taken from Campbell’s book, What is Science?, published in 1921. It is part of the effort that has been made in this century to define our mathematical concepts. Further investigations into the idea of number will be found in this volume, in selections from Tobias Dantzig, Bertrand Russell, and the joint work of Edward Kasner and James R.Newman. For the scientist who undertakes to explain his field to the layman, it is not enough to know the subject thoroughly—he must also be able to imagine what it is like not to know the subject. This is especially difficult when what is being examined is the origin of an idea so familiar that its absence is almost unthinkable. In Measure ment, Campbell surmounts this difficulty by erasing the idea. He provides a clean slate in the form of a pre-numeral measuring system. Then our present-day use of numerals for the process of measuring is shown as a fairly recent invention of the human mind. The distinction that Campbell makes between “numeral” and “number” is very important. The first is a symbol for the second, which is a property. Numerals can be added, subtracted, and manipulated in other ways without regard to what properties these numerals represent. As the numerals themselves fall into patterns, it is often valuable to ask whether or not a new pattern is a picture of something that exists in the material world. It is the discovery of these new pictures that makes measurement of such importance to science. The use of numerals in measurement leads, in the second article, to an examination of numerical laws and the further uses of mathematics in science. And here we see the mathematician as artist. His sense of form, neatness, and beauty tells him when an arrangement of symbols looks good. Feeling that such an attractive array of scrawls should have some counterpart in the physical world, he often finds that they do, and a new scientific law is discovered. Henri Poincaré has written on this aesthetic sense which all great mathematicians have, but has confessed that he could not explain it. In his repeated wonder that the world conforms to such a great extent to our ideas, Campbell sees logic as something that is inborn in the human mind. Ideas arrived at by intellectual activity may be logically true, but they must be tested by experiment before they can be accepted as descriptions of the way the world actually works. Campbell is not writing for the mathematician here. He is conscientiously nontechnical. He does more than describe some applications of mathematics to science: he leads you into thinking about thinking.