Author: Henry Adams Henry Adams was born in Boston in 1838, the grandson of the sixth President of the United States and the great-grandson of the second. Although a man of such ancestry was more or less expected to seek a career in politics, neither Henry’s times nor his temperament permitted him to do so. The sort of scholar-statesman he might have been was inconceivable in the later nineteenth century—the Gilded Age—while the analytical turn of mind that had been a family trait emerged in him as a fatal habit of self-doubt. He became instead a historian, spending his life in the study of the social forces over which he could have no active control. In this profession, Adams achieved by common consent the highest rank among his countrymen. His writings, celebrated for their style, convey the witty and ironic detachment with which he viewed every subject, most of all himself. They show as well the scientific and philosophical concerns of his unresting intelligence. As such they have always seemed more than ordinarily interesting. Yet Adams scorned his work, or pretended to, believing that it had made no difference in his day. Convinced that his life had been a failure, he said so at the end of his autobiography, The Education of Henry Adams, the one book by which he has become best known. He was the author of a number of other books. He died in 1918 at Washington, d.c., where as a spectator of power he had chiefly lived. Adams’ History of the United States appeared, in nine volumes, 1889–91. It is one of the major achievements of American historical writing. Some modern historians suggest that it is deficient in not emphasizing the economic forces at work during the period, but all critics agree that the first six chapters of the work constitute one of the best and most illuminating social surveys of any epoch in American history. Two of these chapters—the first and sixth—are reprinted here. The first chapter poses a problem. It recounts the physical and economic resources available to Americans in 1800—the reader will perhaps be surprised to discover how slim they actually were—and asks, implicity and on every page, how it was possible to make, in less than a century, the America which Henry Adams knew. To say nothing of the America we know! For, since Adams wrote, we have come as far again in the direction that he is discussing as his countrymen had come since the beginning of his century. The sixth chapter suggests a possible solution to the problem. According to Adams, American society, despite its pathetically inadequate resources in men and money, was “sound and healthy in every part”—“except for Negro slavery.” But, he tells us, that was not enough. There was something else about America which puzzled almost every visitor. This was, to put it very simply, a dream. “What was it,” Adams asks, echoing the question put by so many jaded Europeans in the early years of the last century, “that…turned the European peasant into a new man within half an hour after landing at New York?” It was something, evidently, that few or no educated foreigners could see. But Jefferson saw it. It was, essentially, an “emotion which caused the poorest peasant in Europe to see what was invisible to poet and philosopher—the dim outline of a mountain summit across the ocean, rising high above the mist and mud of American democracy.” And the results of it we see ourselves. Adams was a pessimist. In other works, he questioned the reality, or at least the direction, of social progress. His pessimism is not particularly evident here. He is as amazed and as full of admiration as any American must be who looks back on his country’s relatively short history. He feels that, despite our faults, despite our errors and mistakes, we have come a long way. Nevertheless, some trace of Adams’ pessimism may be found in the last paragraph of the sixth chapter. He asks a series of questions about the American dream, and about the American effort to achieve it. Could American society “produce,” he wonders, “or was it compatible with, the differentiation of a higher variety of the human race?” He concludes that “nothing less than this was necessary for its complete success.” He forces us to ask whether the American story is a success story after all. In spite of the distance we have come, have we come far enough? Have we done all that we could do? Or is the hardest victory still to be won?