Author: François Guizot François Pierre Guillaume Guizot is famous both as a historian and as a statesman. As a historian, he is the author of several important works on European history; as a statesman, he had a long and impressive political career, climaxed by his becoming chief minister of the government of France. Guizot was born at Nîmes, France, in 1787. His father died on the scaffold in 1794, a victim of the Reign of Terror which followed the French Revolution. François and his mother fled to Geneva, where he remained until he was eighteen. In 1805 he went to Paris to study law. He soon abandoned the law to do literary and historical work, including an annotated translation of Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. His writings brought him considerable fame, and at the age of 25 he was appointed professor of modern history at the famous Sorbonne in Paris. Guizot’s political career began in 1814, when he became a member of the government formed under Louis XVIII, the restored monarch of France. Though he was a conservative and a monarchist, Guizot’s political views were too liberal for the king, and he soon fell out of favor. In 1820 he left the government and returned to his lectures at the Sorbonne. Guizot’s political opinions were even less acceptable to Louis’s successor, Charles X, and in 1822 he was forbidden to continue his lectures. During the next few years, he did his most important historical research and writing. His works of this period include: His tory of Representative Government, History of the English Revolu tion, History of Civilization in Europe, and History of Civilization in France. In 1828, as the result of a change in government, he was permitted to resume his lectures. He was enthusiastically received upon his return to the podium, and the lectures he gave during the next two years were very popular. His lecture on “Civilization” was the first of this series. Guizot returned to political life in 1830, when he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies. He was appointed to various ministry positions during the next decade, and in 1840 he was named Minister of Foreign Affairs. This made him head of the government. He held that position until his government fell in 1848. One of his chief political opponents during this period was Alexis de Tocqueville. The downfall of Guizot’s government is usually attributed to his unwillingness to make any concessions of principle. Guizot never again took part in French politics. After a brief exile in London, he returned to France to write his memoirs and a history of France for young people. He died in 1874 at the age of 86. Civilization and civilized are words we come across frequently in reading and in conversation. We usually pass over them quickly because we feel certain that we know what they mean. But how well do we understand them? Do we know what standards are used to determine whether a nation or a people is civilized? Do we know what qualities must be present in a culture for it to be considered a civilization? Most of us do not. No doubt it would be impossible to arrive at definitions for these terms which would satisfy everyone, but we can find out how a great historian of culture defines them by reading Guizot’s lecture on “Civilization.” Guizot maintains that the most essential element in a civilization is progress: “The idea of progress, of development, appears to me the fundamental idea contained in the word civilization.” The progress should be both social and individual. By social progress Guizot means a constant advance toward “an increasing production of the means of giving strength and happiness to society” and “a more equitable distribution, among individuals, of the strength.” The progress of the individual is marked by “the development of the individual, internal life, the development of man himself, of his faculties, his sentiments, his ideas.” Though at times it may appear that progress takes place in one of these areas and not in the other, Guizot insists that this cannot happen. “All the great developments of the internal man,” he writes, “have turned to the profit of society; all the great developments of the social state to the profit of individual man.” In recent years, when discussing nations and peoples, we have tried to avoid using such words as uncivilized and barbaric because they seem to suggest inferiority. Instead we use words like under-developed and emergent. In a similar fashion, we substitute advanced and industrialized for civilized. But these substituted words are almost as difficult to define as the words they replace. What are the characteristics of an underdeveloped nation? What is an advanced society? It is important that we find answers to questions like these, so that we will know in what direction we should attempt to lead the peoples of the emergent nations. Guizot’s discussion of the concept of civilization will help us to answer them.