Author: Kees Boeke Kees Boeke was born in Holland in 1884. He was trained as a civil engineer and later became a teacher. He founded the internationally famous Werkplaats Children’s Community at Bilthoven, Holland. Werkplaats means “workshop.” In its organization, methods, and curriculum this is a typical progressive school. But Boeke is far from being a typical educator. He is greatly interested in the possibilities of international education, and pupils in the Children’s Community come from many lands. He founded the Dutch section of the New Education Fellowship. And he wrote Cosmic View. Cosmic View is unique. It is the only selection in this set—indeed, it may be the only book in the world—that can be read backward as easily and as naturally as it can be read forward. That sounds impossible. But if you will take a quick look at it, you will immediately see what is meant. It would take much longer to explain how and why the statement is true than for the reader to see that it is true. A glance at the author’s introduction will also be helpful to an understanding of just what it is that Boeke is trying to do and, in particular, of the method of organization he makes use of to present his cosmic view. Once this organization is understood, it becomes clear that the book, though it has a first and last page, has no real starting place. It is arranged according to the powers of ten, but it could have been arranged according to the powers of a thousand, or a million, or a billion. To put it another way, picture number 1, which corresponds in this arrangement to the first power of ten, could as easily have been picture number 3, or 8, or 15. The basis of the arrangement is arbitrary. The book could begin and end anywhere. It is arbitrary, however, only from one point of view—from a point of view which could be called abstract, or mathematical. From another point of view, the beginning of the book is not arbitrary at all. The author starts with the familiar. The first picture is of a little girl, with a cat in her arms. They are quite recognizable. Toward the middle of the book, this picture is repeated. That is not surprising. We expect to find something of human size at the center of the scale. It is a traditional idea that man is at the center of things. Plato has Protagoras say that “man is the measure of all things.” Pope sees man “in this isthmus of a middle state.” And the astronomer Harlow Shapley suggests that man is really about halfway in size between our galaxy as a whole—that is, the largest thing we know anything about—and an atomic particle—the smallest thing. Whether this is strictly true is not the question. Man is the reference point for man. Science, like everything else, starts with our seeing the world around us. And we see the world in relation to ourselves. What is small is small relative to us; what is large is large relative to us, too. It should be noted that on Boeke’s scale there is a great deal more “space” in the direction of the vast than in the direction of the minute. Using powers of ten, he journeys “upward” to ten to the twenty-sixth power, and “downward” only to ten to the minus thirteenth power. Thus he has gone farther “up” and “out” than he has gone “down” and “in.” And anyone who is acquainted with power series will realize that, though twenty-six is twice thirteen, he has gone much more than twice as far “out” as he has gone “in.” Indeed, he has gone millions and billions of times farther in the one direction on his scale than in the other, because he stops at the relative magnitude of the atomic nucleus on his “inward” journey. An atomic particle would be much smaller—how much, we do not really know. Not only is the reading direction of this book arbitrary—its length is arbitrary, too. Why does Boeke stop in the “outward” direction at ten to the twenty-sixth power? The reason is that beyond that order of magnitude we know almost nothing, if anything at all. Perhaps, as he suggests, the “curvature of space” would begin, at this point, to come into play. Perhaps we will know more about that in a few years or generations. And why does he stop on his “inward” journey at ten to the minus thirteenth power? Again it is a question of the limits of our knowledge. The universe is bounded, Boeke seems to be saying, only by our ignorance. Nature itself does not stop in either direction. It is man, at the center of things, who can see only so far, But he sees farther all the time. That is an exciting thought. Another exciting idea is the one that Boeke suggests at the end of the book. “Looking back on the whole series of 40 pictures,” he says, “we find that in only 10 of them (3 to −6) is life known to exist. In other scales there may, however, be forms of life we do not yet know.” He does not speculate, as some science fiction writers have done, on what these forms of life might be. He realizes that his guess would be no better than anyone else’s. But he does remind us, in a few wise, final sentences, what our responsibilities are when we are faced with a cosmic view. “Man, if he is to become really human,” he writes, “must combine in his being the greatest humility with the most careful and considerate use of the cosmic powers that are at his disposal.” Man, he is asking us to remember, is both very large and very small.