Author: Pierre Simon de Laplace The French encyclopedists of the eighteenth century imagined that they were not far from a final explanation of the universe by physical and mechanical principles. Laplace is representative of that confident age which joyfully overestimated the scope of the new physico-mechanical ideas. Pierre Simon de Laplace was born at Beaumont-en-Auge in Normandy in 1749. His father owned a small estate. At the University of Caen, which he entered at the age of sixteen, he soon demonstrated his mathematical abilities. He was only eighteen when he was appointed professor of mathematics at the École Militaire of Paris. He rose rapidly. In 1773 he took up one of the outstanding problems which until then had resisted all attempts at solution in terms of Newtonian gravitation: the problem of why Jupiter’s orbit appeared to be continually shrinking while Saturn’s was continually expanding. Newton had feared that the planetary system would need divine intervention from time to time if it was to be preserved in anything like its present order. Laplace was able to show that this phenomenon was of periodic nature and could be expected to right itself every 929 years. Laplace’s monumental work on astronomical gravitation, Celestial Mechanics, was published in five volumes between 1799 and 1825. It is a work of formidable abstraction, obscure in style, with great gaps in the arguments bridged by the phrase “it is easy to see.” Nor is it entirely honest writing. He deliberately omitted references to the work of others, presenting the labors of three generations of mathematicians as the fruit of his brain. Nevertheless, it is a triumphant work. Laplace’s contribution in the field of probability is unequaled by any other single investigator. The Analytical Theory of Probabilities (1812) described a calculus for assigning a “degree of rational belief” to propositions about chance events. “Belief” seems a startlingly unscientific notion in this context. We order our daily affairs in the firm belief that the sun will rise tomorrow, but it does not seem to be an idea to which a definite quantity could be assigned. But, belief can be measured, said Laplace, and he set up the calculus for doing so. Although the concept of probability has become one of the fundamental notions of modern science, the experts are still not able to agree on its meaning. The classic definition, formulated by Laplace, has, to a large extent, been replaced by the “relative frequency” interpretation developed by Charles S.Peirce, as expounded in his essay The Red and the Black. A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities is a nontechnical introduction to the laws of chance. In establishing the ten principles which form the calculus, Laplace deals with “hope” as easily as he does with tossed coins; the principles of probability affect every phase of human life. Everything can be measured. Laplace saw no technical bar to an intelligence which would be able to predict the course of the universe in minutest detail with infallible accuracy. His was not an age of intellectual humility. Modern science is more modest. In some ways the universe is more mysterious than it has ever been. Nature is no longer examined solely in terms of motion and matter. Laplace’s celestial machine established the stability of the universe for a very long time indeed, but not for the “eternal duration” that he claimed. The eighteenth century was unique in the history of ideas. Never before nor since has man been so sure of his ability to comprehend all of nature. Laplace died in 1827. He surrounded himself with astronomers, physicists, naturalists, and mathematicians during his last years. Busy and happy, he received distinguished visitors from all parts of the world. His scientific genius earned for him the title of “the Newton of France.” Laplace has been criticized for his infinite adaptability to changing political environments; his contemporaries cynically referred to his “suppleness.” During the turbulent times of the French Revolution he kept his head—literally—and prospered. As his books entered into successive editions, the introductions were changed to fit the times. Laplace dedicated the 1812 edition of The Analytical Theory of Probabilities to “Napoleon the Great”; in the 1814 edition he suppressed this dedication and wrote “that the fall of empires which aspired to universal domination could be predicted with a very high probability by one versed in the calculus of chance.”