Author: Loren Eiseley Loren Eiseley was born in Lincoln, Nebraska, in 1907. He studied at the University of Nebraska and received his Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of Pennsylvania. He taught at the University of Kansas, at Oberlin College, and at the University of Pennsylvania, where, from 1947, he was head of the department of anthropology, and, from 1959, provost of the university. He has lectured at many universities and has written articles for most of the leading scientific journals as well as for a number of magazines. He has ranged over much of the western United States in search of remains of early postglacial man. The Immense Journey, his first book, appeared in 1957. It is a collection of papers on various subjects, all of them linked together by their common concern with time. Darwin’s Century, an account of the impact of the idea of evolution, was published in 1958, and his remarkable lecture, The Mind as Nature, in 1962. The following selection is a chapter from The Immense Journey. The title refers to the journey through time from the beginning. Not the beginning of man—that occurred only a moment ago, Eiseley says. It is his concern to remind men that there is more to the world than themselves, both in space and time. Man “is rooted in his particular century,” Eiseley writes. “Out of it—forward or backward—he cannot run.” Later in the book he writes: “There is something wrong with our world view. It is still Ptolemaic, though the sun is no longer believed to revolve around the earth.” He seems to be suggesting that there is in our thinking, despite all that we have learned about the past, a kind of temporal parochialism. The sun is no longer thought to revolve about the earth, but man, Eiseley is saying, still conceives of himself as somehow at the center of the universe. And if this is true, his argument runs, how much more difficult it must be for us to give up the illusion that the human epoch is the be-all and end-all of time. We are fixed, in other words, even more irremovably in the Now than in the Here. Only by an effort of the imagination can we break out of our temporal strait jackets. But there is a great reluctance, Eiseley suggests, to do so. If we are to succeed, we must use words in new ways. Eiseley’s words in the following selection have a strange quality. He uses many surprising metaphors, and most of them have a special character. If it is read carefully, his text is seen to use terms standing for more or less violent spatial movements in order to force us to feel temporal movements. At the beginning, for example, he sets the scene: it is, typically, in no definite place, for its purpose is to make us see change in time. He descends into the Slit, and it is at once obvious that this spatial descent is a movement backward in time. “The Slit was a little sinister…for over me the sky seemed already as far off as some future century I would never see.” The word “far” in that sentence has two meanings, in space and time, and so does the word “see.” One can find other examples of Eiseley’s attempt to bring us, by the use of unexpected metaphors, to an understanding of the vastness, and indeterminacy, of time. He points to that place of “converging roads where…cat and man and weasel must leap into a single shape.” The word “leap” in that sentence is one of these metaphors. He conceives of himself as “already caught a few feet above (the skull) in the strata,” and thus caught, as it were, in a long-past epoch. “Living creatures flow,” he says, again using a surprising word to produce his effect, “with little more consistency than clouds from age to age.” He remembers “lifting, as I always did, a figurative lantern to some ambiguous crossroads sign within my brain.” There are crossroads, he is saying, in time as well as space. And when he emerges from the crack in the earth, which is also a crack in time, he is cautious, lest he might have strayed into an era different from the one he knew. “I looked all about carefully,” he says, “in a sudden anxiety that it might not be a grazing horse that I would see.” For the moment, at least, it was conceivable that it might have been a mammoth—or some strange animal that does not yet walk the earth. It is clear that Eiseley’s language is special, and also that it is different from that of most of the other scientists in this volume. Strictly speaking, he is not here recounting observations of nature or telling us the results of experiments on it. Indeed, he is perhaps not telling us anything that we do not already know. Rather, he is telling us what we do know, but what, he seems to be insisting, we nevertheless refuse to accept. The Immense Journey is not in itself a scientific work; it is a work, by a distinguished scientist, that is a result of the scientific world view. As such, it is a representative of an important body of modern writing. And it is of course, in itself, extremely fine.