Author: Charles Robert Darwin Charles Darwin was born, as he tells us in this autobiography, on February 12, 1809, at Shrewsbury, England. On the same day, in a log cabin in the backwoods of the pioneer state of Kentucky, was born Abraham Lincoln. Darwin was the grandson of the poet-naturalist Erasmus Darwin; his mother was the daughter of the great pottery maker Josiah Wedgwood; his cousin was Francis Galton. The family was distinguished in many walks of life, but especially in science; four of Darwin’s sons became prominent scientists, and three of them were knighted. He was not knighted himself. Evolution was too scandalous a doctrine for its leading spokesman to be so honored. Of course, he was the recipient of greater and more lasting honor than any English monarch could confer. Do we not believe him when he says that it was “truly surprising” to him that he “should have influenced to a considerable extent the belief of scientific men on some important points”? That is, we believe in the sincerity of his surprise; no one can doubt the importance of the revolution in thought he brought about. “My name ought to last for a few years,” he says. Again the simplicity of the remark seems the best proof of its sincerity. The “few years” have stretched to nearly a century, and it appears probable that the name of Darwin will be known as long as science endures. Most of the facts of his life are told us by himself. His diffidence may mask the truth that, despite the prior work of Wallace, the Origin of Species was as remarkable for its originality as for its eloquence. He charitably omits more than passing references to the attacks that he, as its author, had to suffer for the remainder of his life. And we might not know from Darwin’s account of them that his other publications would have been sufficient in themselves to make him the leading naturalist of his time. Darwin died on April 19, 1882, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. His death occurred less than a year after the last paragraphs of his autobiography were written. Darwin’s Autobiography is not a formal work. He wrote it, he says, for amusement, and because it “might possibly interest” his descendants. He took “no pains about (the) style of writing.” Yet the little book is fascinating. We cannot put it down. Why is this? Perhaps it is because the very simplicity and ingenuousness of the account lend credence to it. It has been said that the hardest person to tell the truth about is oneself. Darwin remarks that “no man can…correctly” describe the state of his own mind. Yet there are some things that a man knows about himself that no one else knows. These things are here. Three items, among many, are of particular interest. They are minutiae, perhaps, in the life of this great man, but significant ones. First, there is the fact that, in his old age, he had “wholly lost, to (his) great regret, all pleasure from poetry of any kind.” His mind, he felt, had “become a kind of machine for grinding general laws out of large collections of facts.” Darwin himself was concerned and puzzled by this. “Why this should have caused the atrophy of that part of the brain alone, on which the higher tastes depend,” he writes, “I cannot conceive.” He suggests that the loss might be due to weakness of intellect. Leaving aside this explanation, which seems unapt in his case, it is indeed something to ponder. In other words, are science and art really so deeply opposed? Do they depend for their existence and appreciation on two quite different kinds of minds? Second, what he tells us about his methods of work is instructive. When writing a book, he made outline after outline, each longer and more detailed than those that preceded it. This is a good way to compose any expository work. Almost anyone can get guidance from the paragraphs in which he describes his habits of writing. Finally, there is his reply to the critics who claimed that he had no “power of reasoning.” “I do not think that this can be true,” he says, “for the Origin of Species is one long argument from the beginning to the end… No one could have written it without having some power of reasoning.” The wonderful charm of the man shines through that last sentence. The reader who does not smile at it would not smile at anything.