Author: Lancelot Hogben Lancelot Hogben, British scientist and economist, was born in Portsmouth in 1895. He was the son of a clergyman. Educated at Cambridge, he has held university posts in England, Scotland, South Africa and Canada. Hogben’s interest in the problems of man in society dates from a very early age when he was introduced to the plays of George Bernard Shaw and to the socialist literature of the Fabian Society by a schoolmistress at the Tottenham County School. One of man’s problems arises from his failure to understand the scientific language of his culture. To bridge the gap that has developed between the average man and his scientific environment, Hogben wrote Science for the Citizen and Mathematics for the Million. The following selection is taken from the latter work. Hogben has written and lectured not only on mathematics but on zoology, social biology, natural history, sociology, economics, medical statistics, and probability. He has also written an illustrated history of 30,000 years of human visual communication, From Cave Painting to Comic Strips. In Mathematics, the Mirror of Civilization, Hogben brings the zeal of a social reformer to the task of rescuing mathematics from the fate of becoming a priestcraft. Since much of man’s relation to man and nature has come to be treated in mathematical terms, it is dangerous to ignore the new language. We run the risk of leaving the power to control our political and material welfare in the hands of specialists. If these specialists have, as did the ancient Egyptian priests, a vested interest in mystifying the people, an unhealthy situation develops. “No society,” says Hogben, “is safe in the hands of its clever people.” In our atomic age, Hogben’s apprehensions seem particularly valid. In contradistinction to most of the other authors represented in this volume, Hogben does not have much use for mathematics as a purely speculative activity. He is solidly planted in opposition to the view of mathematics that is usually associated with Plato. Plato held that mathematics reflects absolute and eternal truths, but Hogben sees it as merely a useful language, with rules based on convenience, like ordinary grammar. In this respect, he has much in common with Poincaré. But Poincaré, like Russell, Whitehead, and Forsyth, argues for the study of mathematics as an esthetic experience which is undertaken for its own sake. To this, Hogben is opposed. His broad outline of the history of mathematics shows mathematical invention and discovery only as the result of man’s effort to control his environment. Many of Hogben’s ideas are thus controversial. You may find yourself with him or against him. But if you are baffled and discouraged by the whole world of mathematics, Hogben is heartening. He flays with caustic wit those who have brought you to your present condition. They have concealed from you, he says, the story of the human origin of mathematics. It is this story that he tells.