Author: Thomas Carlyle Thomas Carlyle, the prophet of heroes and hero worship, was born of humble parents in Ecclefechan, Scotland, in 1795. His father, a stonemason and small farmer, strained the family resources to provide his talented son with an education. The family bonds of the Carlyles were to remain strong through thick and thin—mostly thin—and Thomas later gave much financial assistance to his brothers. At the age of fourteen, Thomas walked ninety miles to the University of Edinburgh, where he enrolled to study the ministry. Things turned out differently. He was attracted to mathematics and even more to literature, became a teacher for a spell, and then, in 1818, a hack writer for Edinburgh publications. It was about this time that he fell in love with the writings and the personality of Goethe, and read voraciously in German authors of the time, who were little known in England. In 1823–24, he published a life of the poet Schiller and a translation of Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister’s Ap prenticeship. He was fast becoming, with Coleridge, the interpreter of German thinkers in England. He was himself profoundly influenced by the philosophy of Kant and Fichte. He thenceforth looked for the reality and divinity of men, especially heroes, behind the appearances. Clothes do not make the man, he wrote in his Sartor Resartus; they conceal the spiritual self. Neither is the world to be judged by its sordid strivings for pleasure and economic gains—its mere outer garment. In 1826 Carlyle had married the brilliant Jane Baillie Welsh, and soon after settled down with her on a lonely farm at Craigenputtock, where he lived inexpensively and wrote for periodicals. There Ralph Waldo Emerson paid him a visit, and the two men remained close friends for life. In 1834 John Stuart Mill persuaded Carlyle to come to London, where materials for his work in progress, The French Revolution, would be available. When the first volume was completed, he gave it to Mill to read, but a foolish servant girl used it to make a fire. Carlyle was undaunted. “It will be good for the character,” he reflected; and he wrote the whole volume over again. The finished work, published in 1837, was immensely popular and established Carlyle’s fame on firm ground. Carlyle’s theme is the divinely inspired hero-king. He is no ordinary hereditary monarch; without him the nation falters and disintegrates. He is the “Ablest Man…the truest hearted, justest, the Noblest Man.” The Anglo-Saxon word for king is Könning, which means Able-man. He is the man who is able to direct the scattered forces of the nation, torn by jealousies and special interests, to an ideal goal. The first problem is to find this man. Although there are many counterfeit heroes, Carlyle warns us against skepticism and fault-finding. It is better that the leader make mistakes than that there should be no leader at all. A second problem which crops up is whether leaders or laws are the best safeguard of our liberties and welfare. Sometimes the fate of a country seems to depend on a single man, a Washington or a Lincoln. Yet we see to it that laws are passed to which all heroes and would-be heroes must bow. There is no doubt how Carlyle would stand on this issue. Of the two heroes whom Carlyle portrays in the essay which follows, Napoleon had a much better reputation than Cromwell. Carlyle reverses this judgment, and makes a stirring defense of the real Cromwell—so much misunderstood and maligned. Even his rigors and cruelties were virtues—marks of an indomitable will to do what had to be done. Napoleon was also an “Able-man.” Yet in the end he betrayed his cause for a throne, whereas Cromwell remained true to the Revolution, and could not be tempted. What are the moving forces of history? is the question that has been raised. It cannot be avoided if we are to understand the things that are going on today, and what the future is likely to bring. In the nineteenth century several theories were advanced. For Hegel world history was a battleground of ideas and spiritual forces; for Marx it was a battleground of classes, technologies, and economic forces. Hegel saw history progressing toward something like the Prussian monarchy, whereas for Marx the goal is the classless society. Carlyle’s interpretation was altogether different. The decisive and constructive forces in history are its great men and heroes. Every era and every crisis of history has its superlative men, who are able to take the helm and to convert chaos and destruction into something meaningful and worthy. But they must be given a chance. They must be recognized for what they are. When doubt, distrust, and envy stifle the natural inclination to revere and obey true leaders, stagnation and degeneracy follow. This was what had happened in his own time, Carlyle thought. Petty men, calculation, meanness dominated the national scene. The very opposite view was put forward by Tolstoy a few years later. In his novel War and Peace, he argues that the leaders supposed to have shaped history were actually its pawns—and heartless egoists at that. He shows us Napoleon on the battlefield and Napoleon grunting in his bathtub. In neither role is he exceptional or admirable. Such clashes of opposing judgments help us to find the truth for ourselves.