Author: Dmitri Mendeleev Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev (or Mendeleyev) was the youngest of seventeen children. He was born at Tobolsk, Siberia, in 1834. He studied science at St. Petersburg, where he graduated in chemistry. He studied further abroad with Regnault and Bunsen, inventor of the famous burner. He was made professor of chemistry at the University of St. Petersburg, but in 1890 he resigned the position to become Director of the Bureau of Weights and Measures. There he remained until his death. His best known work was on the periodic law of the elements, but he did important research in many branches of chemistry. He studied the nature of solutions and investigated the expansion of liquids when heated. He studied the origins of petroleum, and he speculated on the nature of the ether, that will-o’-the-wisp of nineteenth-century physics. He wrote The Principles of Chemistry in 1868–70. It is a standard work which has gone through many editions in a number of languages. The following selection is often printed as an appendix. Mendeleev was also one of the great teachers of his time. His lecture room was always crowded. Many of his auditors found it difficult to keep up with him. The subject was difficult, his reasoning tight; he wasted no words. These are characteristics of the selection that follows. Yet it was said that all of his listeners gained from him “a lesson in scientific thinking.” He died in St. Petersburg in 1907. The atomic theory was first proposed by such ancient writers as Democritus and Lucretius. Dalton, the English chemist, revived it in the 18th century to explain chemical reactions. In the beginning of the 19th century, the distinction between chemical elements—that is, substances which could not be broken down into components—and compounds became clear. But the atomic hypothesis was not enough in itself. Given a group of apparently unrelated chemical elements, it was desirable to put them in some sort of order. Many men tried to do this, but Mendeleev was the first to suggest an adequate arrangement. He describes the “three series of data without the knowledge of which the periodic law could not have been discovered.” None of these was gathered by Mendeleev. His effort was synthetic rather than analytical. The periodic law was, he says, “a direct outcome of the stock of generalizations and established facts which had accumulated by…1870.” Still, the law was a very great discovery. Why was this so? And why was Mendeleev’s formulation of the relation between the elements preferred to those that had gone before? Mendeleev lists eight considerations which led him to propose the law. The sixth is the most important. He was able to predict that elements of a certain weight would be found, though they were not yet known. On his hypothesis, he predicted the existence, and a number of the properties, of elements which he called ekaboron, eka-aluminum, eka-silicon, eka-manganese, dvi-manganese and eka-tantalum. (“Eka” means “one,” “dvi” means “two.” Thus the words are in effect like mathematical subscripts.) These hypothetical elements were soon discovered: they are now called, respectively, scandium, gallium, germanium, technetium, rhenium, and protactinium. Mendeleev’s hypothesis was thus triumphantly validated. It was recognized after Mendeleev’s death, due to the work of such men as Planck, Einstein, Bohr, and others, that the order of elements in the periodic table corresponds to their atomic numbers, and that these in turn depend on the number of protons in the atomic nuclei. But this new knowledge has not contradicted the old law; in fact, it has increased its value. The periodic law, the genesis of which is described in this selection, is one of the fundamentals of modern science.