Author: John Tyndall John Tyndall was born in Ireland in 1820, and though in his childhood he attended the village school, he was largely self-educated. He became interested in surveying, started out by carrying the chain for a surveying group, and in a few years was in charge of it. He made maps and worked out complicated calculations, in the process practicing his mathematics, for which he had a flair. He then took a job as a railroad builder. After three years of this he went to England, where he found a position as a teacher of science at a provincial college. He had saved four hundred pounds, and now, at the age of twenty-eight, he set out for Marburg University, in Germany. There he exerted himself to the utmost. After a year, he was made assistant to Bunsen, the great chemist, and at the end of the second year, he received his doctorate. In 1853, after returning to England, Tyndall was appointed professor of physics at the Royal Institution, on the recommendation of Faraday. He held the position for the rest of his life. Tyndall’s most important investigations were probably in the theory of heat. His book, Heat Considered as a Mode of Motion (1863), had great influence. It was the first popular exposition of the mechanical theory of heat. He also did work in many other areas of science, particularly in meteorology. Among other experiments was one in which he explained why the sky is blue. But it is likely that he was more distinguished for his exposition of the work of other men than for original researches of his own. His “Belfast Address” (1874), in which he surveyed the entire course of nineteenth-century scientific discovery, was a model of clarity and comprehensibility. He died on December 4, 1893. Tyndall was extremely close to Faraday, both as colleague and friend. Faraday continued to do active work at the Royal Institution for several years after Tyndall arrived there. Even after his retirement, Faraday would often visit the laboratory and attend the Friday Evening Discourses—a weekly program of popular lectures on science which Faraday had started years before. Faraday died in August, 1867, and four months later, Tyndall gave a memorial discourse on “Faraday as Scientist and Man.” This was published in 1868 under the title Faraday as a Discoverer, and the following selection consists of its first three chapters. “It is not my intention,” Tyndall says, “to lay before you a life of Faraday in the ordinary acceptation of the term. The duty I have to perform is to give you some notion of what he has done in the world.” The subject as stated was an immense one. Not only did Faraday rise from the humblest beginnings. Not only was his main research undertaken in an area—electromagnetism—which has proved to be fruitful beyond the wildest expectations. And not only was he so extraordinarily gifted that he produced important and original results in almost every field he entered. But “taking him for all in all,” Tyndall concludes, “I think it will be conceded that Michael Faraday was the greatest experimental philosopher the world has ever seen.” Hence, Faraday as the subject of even a limited biography would seem to present almost insuperable obstacles. Tyndall was, however, highly gifted himself, and in exactly the respects that were most necessary for the completion of his task. It goes without saying that he understood Faraday’s work. He also had a facility for explaining it, which is evident in the selection that follows. Above all, he knew and loved Faraday. There seems to be no doubt that his knowledge and love were important elements in the success of the book. Tyndall’s Faraday as a Discoverer bears comparison in many respects with Eve Curie’s Madame Curie. Both biographers were presented with similar problems, for few experimentalists can rank with Faraday with as much justice as Marie Curie. And both biographers seem to have made the same decision as to how to proceed. Both added nothing to the facts; both claimed that nothing except the facts was necessary to make a fascinating story. And both drew analogies from the world of nature itself, in an attempt to explicate their subjects. “Nature, not education, rendered Faraday strong and refined,” Tyndall writes. “A favorite experiment of his own was representative of himself. He loved to show that water in crystallizing excluded all foreign ingredients, however intimately they might be mixed with it. Out of acids, alkalis, or saline solutions, the crystal came sweet and pure. By some such natural process in the formation of this man, beauty and nobleness coalesced, to the exclusion of everything vulgar and low.”