Author: John Stuart Mill John Stuart Mill worked hard for reform through political action. Yet he was convinced that “no great improvements in the lot of mankind are possible until a great change takes place in the fundamental constitution of their modes of thought.” He lamented the lack of an accepted standard of the right and good in human action and the consequent want of certitude in moral and political matters. He knew but rejected the long tradition that Nature provides such a standard. In antiquity both Stoics and Epicureans, the most popular schools of philosophy, had proposed “Follow Nature” as their motto for moral action. In the doctrine of natural law, as found for example in Thomas Aquinas, the concept of nature provides the basis for a highly elaborated system of morality and justice. Mill presents his reasons for rejecting these traditions in the following essay, entitled Nature. Nature is one of the great and key ideas of human thought; it constitutes Chapter 60 in The Great Ideas. From the wide range of meanings that the term has acquired, Mill concentrates upon two: “It either denotes the entire system of things…or it denotes things as they would be, apart from human intervention.” In neither sense, Mill argues, does nature provide a standard for human action. He claims that to follow nature is poor advice in any sense other than that the study and observation of nature is necessary as a prelude to intelligent action. He flatly denies that nature unmodified by man can offer anything that man should imitate. For the injunction “Follow Nature” he proposes to substitute “Control and Amend Nature.” In this, he sets himself against Thoreau and Wordsworth, who find in nature their greatest teacher; and also against Rousseau and Freud, who claim that the repression of man’s natural inclinations is perhaps the greatest source of discontent. The essay on nature is one of the Three Essays on Religion, published posthumously in 1874. It has important bearings on questions of religion, besides its rejection of natural law, which for Aquinas is a participation in the eternal law of God. It also questions whether the order and design of nature can afford evidence for the existence of a just and benevolent creator. Mill touches upon the problem of evil. This, as is known from Augustine’s story of his conversion, is often a stumbling block in man’s search for God.