Author: Rachel L. Carson Rachel Carson was born at Springdale, Pennsylvania, in 1907. She studied at Pennsylvania College for Women (Chatham College) and received an M.A. from Johns Hopkins University, in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1932. She was an assistant in zoology at the University of Maryland (1931–36), and an assistant in zoology at Johns Hopkins during the summers of the same years. She undertook research at the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole, Massachusetts. From 1952 she was an associate of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. In 1936 she joined what is now called the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, a branch of the Department of the Interior. In 1949 she became the service’s editor-in-chief. The Sea around Us, from which the following selection is taken, was published in 1951. The book won many prizes, including the National Book Award. A prize-winning documentary movie was made from it. Miss Carson is also the author of Under the Sea Wind (1941), The Edge of the Sea (1955), and Silent Spring (1962). The last is a brilliantly written polemic against the indiscriminate use of insecticides which have the effect of producing irreversible changes in the ecological balance. It has been the cause of much discussion and controversy. She died at Silver Spring, Maryland, on April 14, 1964. It has been claimed that the scientist and the poet have much in common and should be friends. They seldom are; and it is even more rare, as is the case with Miss Carson, to find them combined in one single person. Miss Carson has published poems and scientific papers. The Sea around Us partakes of both forms of communication between human beings. Poetry may, perhaps should, contradict itself; the theory is, at least, that science should not. By her use of metaphor and of exaggeration, or of hyperbole, Miss Carson proclaims her poetic inclinations. She speaks of that “half the earth that is covered by milesdeep, lightless water, that has been dark since the world began.” Earlier in the volume, however, she had recounted how the world—by this she means the earth—existed for hundreds of millions of years before there was any ocean at all. Nevertheless, “dark since the world began” is an effective phrase, and it gives the reader exactly the impression desired: that is, of an environment that is unchangingly, “eternally” dark. Again, Miss Carson refers to the “endless night” of this same portion of the deep, or “sunless,” sea. She speaks of the “abysmal depths” of the sea, and of the “abyssal creatures” that live there. Such words are forcefully connotative; they remind the reader of those descriptions which are common among poets, and which emphasize the beauty, terror, and mystery of the sea. The Sea around Us is a superior work of scientific popularization, and the chapter from it reprinted below is noteworthy for the amount of knowledge it disseminates, as well as for the charming and, indeed, awe-inspiring way in which it does so. But it should be pointed out that much research has been done, much investigation undertaken, in the deep sea since 1951. The puzzling question of the “phantom bottom” has been answered: it is plankton, after all. The true bottom of the deep ocean has in many places now been mapped. Nevertheless, it is still correct, as Miss Carson says, that “this region has withheld its secrets more obstinately than any other.” It is claimed that more is known about the depths of space than about the ocean depths of our own planet. Why this should be so is not entirely clear. The sea is, of course, dangerous to land animals, and to man. But so are the high mountains, and they have been explored for a century. And so is space. The darkness of the deep sea—the “endless night” to which Miss Carson refers, and which she makes so vivid—may be at the heart of the problem. Men are even more animals of the light than of the land. Is there not something intrinsically frightening about dark water? So at least the dreams of human beings would seem to indicate. If so, then Miss Carson’s poetic language may be just right for talking about the deep sea. Poetry has been from time immemorial man’s way of dealing with the terrors of the dark unknown.