Author: William Kingdon Clifford William Kingdon Clifford was born at Exeter, England, in 1845. He studied at King’s College, London, and then at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was a brilliant student. He was elected a fellow of Trinity but gave up the position, in 1871, to become professor of mathematics at University College, London. While still a student he began to produce original mathematical papers, and he later made important contributions to mathematics. He was primarily a geometer, treating especially the problems of the new non-Euclidean geometries, but his thought ranged over all mathematical questions. He was also much concerned to understand, and to make others understand, the basic ideas which underlie all science, and he gave many popular lectures in which he discussed these matters in a lucid, witty, and eloquent style. Though many eminent nineteenth-century scientists gave popular lectures—among them Faraday, Helmholtz, T.H.Huxley, and Tyndall, all of whom are represented in these volumes—it is possible that Clifford took the task more seriously than any of them. At any rate, his popular lectures, though they do not avoid all difficulties, are as entertaining and also enlightening as those of any of his contemporaries. Clifford published several books before he died of pulmonary tuberculosis in Madeira on March 3, 1879, when he was only 35 years old. In the last year or two before his death he was engaged in writing a book to be called The First Principles of the Mathe matical Sciences Explained to the Non-Mathematical. He did not have time to finish the work. It was published six years after his death, edited by Karl Pearson, under the title The Common Sense of the Exact Sciences. Clifford chose the new title a few days before he died. Clifford’s mathematical interests lay chiefly in geometry, which underwent disturbing and exciting changes in the nineteenth century. For more than two thousand years the system perfected by Euclid had been accepted as a true description of geometric relations in space. But this position was undermined by the investigations of several outstanding mathematicians. Among them were Clifford, Lobachevski, and Riemann. The Postulates of the Science of Space deals with what Euclid left unsaid. When Euclid listed his basic premises, he made some assumptions about space that he did not state. He was probably unaware that he was making them. Our intuition seems to tell us that all parts of space are exactly alike, and that space is continuous. But is it “true”? It is reasonable to suppose that, like most of us, even the mighty Euclid never thought of asking that question. As a matter of fact, it is in the very nature of a postulate that we do not ask if it is true. It is merely some statement that we agree to accept without proof. The postulates may be any that we please, provided only that they do not lead to flat contradictions. In contrast to Bertrand Russell, Clifford does not question the logic of Euclid’s geometry. But, he suggests, other geometries deduced from postulates differing from those framed by Euclid—especially his parallel postulates—are not only logically sound, but might turn out to be better descriptions of space. Lobachevski knocked the “eternal truth” out of geometry. Clifford compares him to Copernicus, who revolutionized astronomy. The development of several geometries, each consistent within itself, but each contradictory to all others, offered the makings of a first-class battle. The battle was fought, and it ended. No one lost—or won. In a state of coexistence, each has found important applications in science. One famous example is Einstein’s non-Euclidean universe, based on Riemann’s geometry. Does any geometry present a picture of the way things really are? That, says Clifford, can only be tested by observation. And our tools for observing are limited. “The geometer of today knows nothing about the nature of actually existing space at an infinite distance; he knows nothing about the properties of this present space in a past or future eternity.” Clifford’s writings in science, mathematics, and philosophy are both profound and clear. In The Postulates of the Science of Space his gift for making difficult ideas understandable is applied to that most delicate task—examining what we have always taken for granted.