Author: Mark Twain In 1883, when Mark Twain was already a famous author, he could look back with longing on his career as a river-boat pilot. “I loved the profession far better than any I have followed since,” he wrote. What had been the great appeal? In Life on the Mississippi he explains. The sleepy town of Hannibal, Missouri, was galvanized each day by the arrival of the packet boat. All was turmoil and excitement, and Mark Twain and other small boys raced to the dock, as to a circus. For them the desire to be a steamboat pilot was as fond a dream as being an airplane pilot or an astronaut is for boys today. Such dreams are achieved only by determination and courage. Mark Twain’s apprenticeship under his pilot chief was grueling, and he tells us that if he had known what was required he “should not have had the courage to begin.” He was taught to recognize the changing shape of the river, the deadly shoals appearing overnight, the feel of the boat, and the face of the water. His memory had to be quick, his judgment alert, and he had to have the courage and confidence to rely on them. “Every trivial detail of twelve hundred miles of river” had to be known “with absolute exactness.” At the wheel on one occasion he was ordered to “shave those steamships as close as you’d peel an apple.” It was certainly hair raising, for he knew that one little error could be fatal. Ship, cargo, and all hands and passengers, if there were any, would be swallowed up by the treacherous river. Yet Twain took “a measureless pride” in the profession, once he had learned it. The river-boat pilot, he said, is the most independent being on earth—more so than a king, who is, after all, a servant of parliament. Once the ship is under way, the pilot’s word is law, and not even a king would dare to contradict him. Today we can read stories of aviation written by such flyers as Saint-Exupery and Charles Lindbergh. Our newspapers and magazines give us minute accounts of the astronauts’ flights. Thousands of boys are stirred by the daring skill and absolute command of these modern heroes, as they were in Mark Twain’s day by the lonely courage of the pilot. Life on the Mississippi is unique as the saga of the nineteenth-century pilot on the majestic old river, and it is notable for its humorous realism. Rudyard Kipling had Mark Twain’s humor in mind when he said, “Cervantes was a relation of his.” As you read, you might keep a lookout for this alleged similarity.