continue..
able, and fastened his horse with the other hand to a thorn. Then he turned on his side, and crawled as best he might into the lodge. Looking through a crevice of the bower he saw the stars shining in the sky, and one brighter than all the others, so he began to repeat— Now is sung: Poem ```Little Star I gaze upon Sweetly drawing to the moon, In such golden haunt is set Love, and bright-haired Nicolette. God hath taken from our war Beauty, like a shining star. Ah, to reach her, though I fell From her Heaven to my Hell. Who were worthy such a thing, Were he emperor or king? Still you shine, oh, perfect Star, Beyond, afar.``` Now they say and tell and relate: When Nicolette heard Aucassin speak these words she hastened to him from where she was hidden near by. She entered in the bower, and clasping her arms about his neck, kissed and embraced him straitly. “Fair sweet friend, very glad am I to find you.” “And you, fair sweet friend, glad am I to meet.” So they kissed, and held each other fast, and their joy was lovely to see. “Ah, sweet friend,” cried Aucassin, “it was but now that I was in grievous pain with my shoulder, but since I hold you close I feel neither sorrow nor wound.” Nicolette searched his hurt, and perceived that the shoulder was out of joint. She handled it so deftly with her white hands, and used such skilful surgery, that by the grace of God (who loveth all true lovers) the shoulder came back to its place. Then she plucked flowers, and fresh grass and green leafage, and bound them tightly about the setting with the hem torn from her shift, and he was altogether healed. “Aucassin,” said she, “fair sweet friend, let us take thought together as to what must be done. If your father beats the wood to-morrow, and men take me, whatever may chance to you, certainly I shall be slain.” “Certes, fair sweet friend, the sorer grief would be mine. But so I may help, never shall you come to his hands.” So he mounted to horse, and setting his love before him, held her fast in his arms, kissing her as he rode, and thus they came forth to the open fields. Now is sung: Poem ```Aucassin, that loving squire, Dainty fair to heart’s desire, Rode from out the forest dim Clasping her he loved to him. ’Laced upon the saddle bow There he kissed her, chin and brow, There embraced her, mouth and eyes. But she spake him, sweetly wise; “Love, a term to dalliance, Since for us no home in France Seek we Rome or far Byzance?” “Sweet my love, all’s one to me, Dale or woodland, earth or sea; Nothing care I where we ride So I hold you at my side.” So, enlaced, the lovers went, Skirting town and battlement, Rocky scaur, and quiet lawn; Till one morning, with the dawn, Broke the cliffs down to the shore, Loud they heard the surges roar, Stood by the sea.``` Now they say and tell and relate: Aucassin dismounted upon the sand, he and Nicolette together, as you have heard tell. He took his horse by the bridle, and his damsel by the hand, and walked along the beach. Soon they perceived a ship, belonging to merchants of those parts, sailing close by, so Aucassin made signs to the sailors, and presently they came to him. For a certain price they agreed to take them upon the ship, but when they had reached the open sea a great and marvellous storm broke upon the vessel, and drove them from land to land until they drew to a far-off country, and cast anchor in the port of the castle of Torelore. Then they asked to what realm they had fared, and men told them that it was the fief of the King of Torelore. Then inquired Aucassin what manner of man was this King, and whether there was any war, and men answered— “Yes, a mighty war.” So Aucassin bade farewell to the merchants, and they commended him to God. He belted his sword about him, climbed to horse, taking his love before him on the saddle bow, and went his way till he came to the castle. He asked where the King might be found, and was told that he was in childbed. “Where, then, is his wife?” And they answered that she was with the host, and had carried with her all the armed men of those parts. When Aucassin heard these things he marvelled very greatly. He came to the palace door and there dismounted, bidding Nicolette to hold the bridle. Then, making his sword ready, he climbed the palace stair, and searched until he came to the chamber where the King lay. Now is sung: Poem ```Hot from searching, Aucassin Found the room and entered in; There before the couch he stayed Where the King, alone, was laid, Marked the King, and marked the bed, Marked this lying-in, then said, “Fool, why doest thou this thing?” “I’m a mother,” quoth the King: “When my month is gone at length, And I come to health and strength, Then shall I hear Mass once more As my fathers did before, Arm me lightly, take my lance, Set my foe a right fair dance, Where horses prance.”``` Now they say and tell and relate: When Aucassin heard the King speak thus he took the linen from the bed, and flung it about the chamber. He saw a staff in the corner, so he seized it, returned to the bed, and beat the King so rudely therewith, that he was near to die. “Ha, fair sire,” cried the King, “what do you require of me? Are you mad that you treat me thus in my own house?” “By the Sacred Heart,” said Aucassin, “bad son of a shameless mother, I will strike with the sword if you do not swear to me that man shall never lie in childbed in your realm again.” He plighted troth, and when he was thus pledged, “Sire,” required Aucassin, “bring me now where your wife is with the host.” “Sire, willingly,” said the King. He got to horse, and Aucassin mounted his, leaving Nicolette at peace in the Queen’s chamber. The King and Aucassin rode at adventure until they came to where the Queen was set, and they found that the battle was joined with roasted crab-apples and eggs and fresh cheeses. So Aucassin gazed upon the sight and marvelled greatly. Now is sung: Poem ```Aucassin hath drawn his rein, From the saddle stared amain, Marked the set and stricken field, Cheered the hearts that would not yield. They had carried to the fight Mushrooms, apples baked aright, And for arrows, if you please, Pelted each with good fresh cheese. He who muddied most the ford Bore the prize in that award. Aucassin, the brave, the true, Watched these deeds of derring do, Laughed loudly too.``` Now they say and tell and relate: When Aucassin saw this strange sight he went to the King and asked of him— “Sire, are these your foes?” “Yea, sire,” answered the King. “And would you that I should avenge you on them?” “Yea,” answered he, “right willingly.” So Aucassin took sword in hand, and throwing himself in the melée, struck fiercely on the right and on the left, and slew many. When the King saw the death that Aucassin dealt he snatched at his bridle and cried— “Hold, fair sire, deal not with them so cruelly.” “What,” said Aucassin, “was it not your wish that I should avenge you on your enemies?” “Sire,” replied the King, “too ready is such payment as yours. It is not our custom, nor theirs, to fight a quarrel to the death.” Thereon the foemen fled the field. The King and Aucassin returned in triumph to the castle of Torelore, and the men of the country persuaded the King that he should cast Aucassin forth from the realm, and give Nicolette to his son, for she seemed a fair woman of high lineage. When Nicolette heard thereof she had little comfort, so began to say— Now is sung: Poem ```Simple folk, and simple King, Deeming maid so slight a thing. When my lover finds me sweet, Sweetly shapen, brow to feet, Then know I such dalliance, No delight of harp, or dance, Sweetest tune, or fairest mirth, All the play of all the earth Seems aught of worth.``` [A section of the only Old French manuscript extant is missing at this point.—Editor] Now they say and tell and relate: Aucassin abode in the castle of Torelore in ease and great delight, having with him Nicolette his sweet friend, whom he loved so well. Whilst his days passed in so easy and delightful a manner a great company of Saracens came in