Author: Sir Charles Lyell Charles Lyell was born in Scotland in 1797, the son of a botanist and translator of Dante. Like his father, he was for a time divided in his choice of a career. At Oxford he studied science, but to earn his bread he prepared for the law. He entered Lincoln’s Inn and was called to the bar in 1825. But he had become progressively more drawn to science; and, after a conflict which lasted several years, he gave up the law and devoted himself entirely to geology. His major work, The Principles of Geology, was completed, in its first edition at least, by the time he was thirty-six years old. A great theorist, Lyell was also a painstaking observer. He studied the marine remains of the Italian Tertiary strata and gave the names Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene to the various ages of the earth. He traveled through Scandinavia and wrote a paper about Swedish mountains. He visited America twice, where he estimated the rate of recession of Niagara Falls, the average yearly increase of the Mississippi Delta, and the composition of the underlying vegetable matter of the Great Dismal Swamp, in Virginia. With another geologist, he discovered the earliest known land shell. Unlike his friend Charles Darwin, Lyell was knighted by Queen Victoria, and later created a baronet. Though he accepted Darwin’s theory—he had, indeed, helped to inspire it with his own work—Lyell was not attacked for his views. It may be that geology is less controversial than anthropology. He died, full of years and honors, on February 22, 1875, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Lyell’s teacher at Oxford, Dr. Buckland, was a “catastrophist.” Catastrophism maintained that the earth’s present conformation was the result of a series of geological crises, ending with the Biblical flood. This was an old idea, and it was still commonly believed in Lyell’s youth. In the centuries before Lyell, men looked at the earth and saw that it was changing, in its main characteristics, very slowly. There was, nevertheless, evidence that it had once been very different. The two facts would not have given trouble if devout Christians had not also believed that the earth was comparatively young. As late as 1800, it was widely held that the world had been created in 4004 b.c. Catastrophism seemed the only way out of the dilemma. It was impossible to deny the slowness of geological change. Mountains do not rise overnight, and rivers wear away their valleys at a pace imperceptible even to generations. It was also impossible to deny the differences in the past. Marine fossils were discovered high above present sea level. Whole continents had apparently changed their shape. Thus, if catastrophism was unacceptable, something else had to give way. What gave way was the view of the age of the earth. The effect of Copernicus had been immensely to increase the size of the universe. The effect of Lyell was immensely to increase its age. Lyell’s Principles of Geology showed, beyond the possibility of reasonable doubt, that the earth was unimaginably old. His later studies, in which he supplied evidence of the antiquity of man, so useful to Darwin, were as nothing to his proofs of the antiquity of fossils like Pupa vetusta, the earliest known land shell. If that little shell was as old as he said it was, much that men believed in would have to be given up. Darwin, for example, received from Lyell a fact essential to his theory of natural selection. Darwin had derived from Malthus the idea that the pressure of environment, the “struggle for existence,” might be the cause of selection. But he could not see, as long as he believed that the world was only a few thousand years old, how the evolution of species could have occurred. When he read Lyell, his eyes were opened. Now there was plenty of time. Age after age stretched out behind the present, during which the slow, cumulative changes that his hypothesis called for could have taken place. There may have been other effects of Lyell’s work. The Copernican Revolution is said to have been one of the greatest shocks that mankind ever experienced. Infinite space “terrified” Pascal. Was it also disturbing to discover that a man’s lifetime, once thought to be a significant portion of the total life of the earth, was no more than an infinitesimal part of it? On the other hand, if the earth had great antiquity, was it not also reasonable to believe that its future might be equally vast in extent? Those who believed that the world had been created in 4004 b.c. also believed that it would end fairly soon. Was it possible now to envision an almost unlimited future, in which mankind could shape a better, a more just and satisfying, existence?