Author: Charles Sanders Peirce Charles Sanders Peirce was born at Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1839. He was the son of Benjamin Peirce, a Harvard professor and a leading mathematician. Peirce’s early education, supervised by his father, was a strenuous experience. The elder Peirce was a forceful man and relentless in his determination to develop his son’s mathematical talents. He sometimes kept the boy awake all night, training him in the “art of concentration” by playing rapid games of double rummy. When Charles began to read philosophers, his father would have him repeat their proofs and in a very few words would usually rip them apart and show them empty. This forced march to education gave young Peirce a wide background in experimental science, mathematics, logic, and philosophy, but it also may have contributed to his later unhappiness and chaotic personal life. In Peirce’s own words: “I insensibly put on a sort of swagger here, which is designed to say, ‘You are a very good fellow in your way; who you are I don’t know and I don’t care, but I, you know, am Mr. Peirce, distinguished for my various scientific acquirements, but above all for the extreme modesty in which respect I challenge the world.’” This is a humorous self-portrait, but apt. Peirce really was a difficult man. He was unable to get along with others, careless about his appearance, impractical in money matters, forgetful, vain, and arrogant. He died in 1914 in poverty, unknown to the general public. Yet today he is recognized as one of the most influential thinkers this country has produced. In 1861 Peirce joined the United States Coast Survey, in which post he remained for thirty years. He served as computer for the nautical almanac, made pendulum investigations, was in charge of gravity research and wrote a number of scientific papers. This government post left him enough time to teach and to engage in private research in science, philosophy, and logic. His contributions to the science of logic are undisputed. Though not extensive, his writings in pure mathematics were original and prophetic. He published only one book in his lifetime, Photometric Researches (1878), but most of his scattered writings have been published posthumously in six volumes, Collected Papers (1931–35). Peirce was the founder of pragmatism, the philosophy that was elaborated by William James and John Dewey. Dewey and James diverged from the original doctrine, but all three represent an interest in relating the abstract to the concrete. Peirce was deeply concerned with the theory of meaning. The main purpose of his investigations was to explain the pragmatic meaning of general terms as they are used by scientists. The following excerpts from an essay entitled How To Make Our Ideas Clear are representative of his doctrine: Our idea of anything is our idea of its sensible effects…. What a thing means is simply what habit it involves…. There is no distinction of meaning so fine as to consist in anything but a possible difference of practice…. The final upshot of thinking is the exercise of volition…. It has been said that pragmatism is a characteristically American movement in philosophy. Its emphasis is on “doing.” Peirce was one of the first proponents of the frequency interpretation of probability. It is in keeping with his whole philosophy that this interpretation agrees with our everyday “common sense” concept. It is also the interpretation most widely used in applied statistics and measurement, and in many branches of the theoretical sciences. The Red and the Black, the selection which follows, is one of the most charming essays on probability ever written. The mathematician-philosopher arrives, by logic, at the conclusion that he is indeed his brother’s keeper. While this is an unusual argument for an ethical principle, it is not the first time that the laws of probability have been invoked to support what is essentially an article of religious belief. Pascal, too, once urged mankind to consider the following odds. “Let us weigh the gain and loss in wagering that God is,” he wrote. “Let us estimate these two chances. If you gain, you gain all; if you lose, you lose nothing. Wager, then, without hesitation, that He is.”