Author: Voltaire The years of exile which Voltaire spent in England, from 1726 to 1729, were the crucial ones of his life. They made him serious. Until then he had been a talented littérateur with a faculty for criticizing and infuriating the orthodoxies of his day. He was welcomed in England as an exile from French illiberality. Accepted in all the leading literary circles, he also moved in the highest ranks of society. Of more significance, he found a subject to study and to write about. The first results appeared in 1733 after he had returned to France. They consisted, as originally entitled, of Philosophical Letters on the English. Voltaire claims that “a Frenchman who arrives in London will find philosophy, like everything else, very much changed there.” The center and source of the change he traces to the empirical science and philosophy which had Sir Isaac Newton as its idol. In these letters Voltaire set himself the task, among others, of expounding this new philosophy. Those dealing with Bacon, Newton, and Locke serve in fact as popular introductions to the major work of these authors. He even attempts the far from easy task of simplifying and popularizing Newton’s theory of gravitational attraction, of the decomposition of light, and of the calculus, or the theory of fluxions as it was then known. Voltaire in fact became so interested in the physics of Newton that he set up a laboratory for conducting experiments in the château at Cirey, where he lived on returning to France. The Marquise du Châtelet, to whom the château belonged, was an accomplished mathematician and physicist. She collaborated with Voltaire on a long treatise on the Newtonian system. In addition to writing another treatise on physics, she also made the first French translation of Newton’s great work. Voltaire rarely wrote anything that was entirely without a political purpose. The Letters pretend to be a report on conditions in England. At the time that Voltaire was there, England was still thought of as a land of political unrest, even of revolution, since memory of the Civil War of the seventeenth century was still fresh. Yet under the guise of a panegyric on English ways, the Letters constitute an attack on all the authorities then reigning in France. Praise of the new empirical philosophy is turned into criticism of the philosophy and physics of Descartes, then dominant in France. The account of liberty in England is made an attack upon the despotism of the French church and state. The Letters were originally published with certain “remarks” upon Pascal which were found so offensive to orthodoxy that the book was condemned and burned. Reason and its triumphs is a theme that runs throughout the Letters as well as the Philosophical Dictionary and the sciencefiction story Micromégas. In this Voltaire well illustrates what is usually referred to as the rationalism of the French Enlightenment. It shows the climate of opinion, which Voltaire himself helped to form, that resulted in the French Revolution and the downfall of the ancient regime.