Author: Henry Adams In his Letter to American Teachers of History Henry Adams records his dark vision of mankind at the mercy of the law of entropy—the gradual running down of the universe. In Adams’ time—roughly the early twentieth century—science could offer no alternative to this process, nor, in his opinion, could any other discipline. Hence his interest in the thirteenth century, when an alternative existed in men’s conception of themselves as part not only of a natural order but also of a divine one that, being eternal, cannot pass away. These two orders were reconciled by medieval theology, of which Adams treats in this discussion of St. Thomas Aquinas, whose Summa Theologica is the great medieval statement. Actually the discussion, which is taken from a longer work by Adams called Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres (1913), is as much about buildings as it is about books. For Adams’ approach to St. Thomas is through the architecture of the Gothic cathedrals, which were constructed in the same age that conceived the Summa and which are looked upon by Adams as products of the same general effort. The effort was to see the whole universe in relation to God and to understand the law by which the universe is governed. But it was also to determine the place of man under that law. Indeed, the relation between man and God was the heart of the medieval structure. This relation was asserted first in the eleventh century by force, Adams says earlier in his book, and the symbol of that is the fortress church of Mont-Saint-Michel. It was developed in the twelfth century as a matter of faith, and the symbol of that is the Cathedral of Chartres. Then at last, as Adams here points out, came the thirteenth-century attempt of St. Thomas to treat the relation in terms of reason—to climb heaven with the mind. While the attempt perhaps was bound to fail, it was, Adams suggests, a magnificent intellectual flight. Its symbol is the thirteenth-century Cathedral of Beauvais, which like the Summa was never finished. Only the choir of Beauvais stands, but its columns rise in one unbroken dizzy sweep to the highest vaulted roof ever reached.