Author: Thomas Henry Huxley T.H.Huxley was born at Ealing, England, on May 4, 1825. He was the son of a schoolmaster, but he received no formal education. “I had…neither help nor sympathy in any intellectual direction till I reached manhood,” he later wrote. He wanted to become an engineer; he studied the subject, and found that he preferred the “mechanical engineering of living machines”—i.e., biology. At seventeen he was much struck by the works of Carlyle, and from him learned “to make things clear and get rid of cant and shows of all sorts.” At the same age he commenced regular medical studies at Charing Cross Hospital, in London, graduating in 1845. He became a surgeon and entered the Navy. He was assigned to H. M. S. “Rattlesnake,” about to start for surveying work in Torres Strait. In the course of the long voyage he made a study of the tropical seas. He united the Medusae and certain polyps to form a class that he called Hydrozoa, and he noted that all members of the class consisted of two membranes enclosing a central cavity. He then suggested that the two membranes correspond to two layers which appear in the embryos of higher animals. This “prophetic generalization” of the ectoderm and endoderm was later used in support of the theory of evolution. After his return in 1850 to England, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society (1851); the following year he received the Royal Medal. Thus at the age of twenty-six, with no assistance from anybody, he had placed himself in the first rank of English scientists. Huxley at this stage of his life accepted the idea of evolution within a type but not from a lower type to a higher one. The Origin of Species changed his mind. He found in Darwin’s theory what he had failed to find in Lamarck and Lyell, namely, an intelligible and persuasive hypothesis: natural selection. By 1892 he could write: “The doctrine of evolution is no speculation, but a generalization of certain facts.” In the meantime he had written many answers to the attacks on Darwin and himself for their advocacy of evolution. Among them were Man’s Place in Nature and Other Anthropological Essays (1863), from which the first of the following selections is taken. On a Piece of Chalk (1868) was inspired by similar aims. Huxley served on ten Royal commissions in twenty-two years, was secretary and then president of the Royal Society, was a member of the London School Board, and in 1892 became a Privy Councillor. He died, after a long and painful illness, on June 29, 1895. On the Relations of Man to the Lower Animals opens with the proposition that “the question of questions for mankind—the problem which underlies all others, and is more deeply interesting than any other—is the ascertainment of the place which man occupies in nature and of his relations to the universe of things.” This is a sweeping assertion and it is perhaps wise to understand from the beginning what it means. Does man have a place in nature? Or is his place, essentially, out of, or above, nature? If he does have a place, is it unique, distinct from the place that all other things have? And does man, even if he has a definite place in nature, have one out of nature, too? These are some of the important questions raised by Huxley’s assertion. To Huxley, nature is a continuum and it includes everything that exists. If man has existence, he must have a place in nature. Huxley here ignores any other mode of existence that man might have. As to the place man occupies, however, Huxley is impartial. He imagines himself and his reader to be visiting scientists from another planet. They come upon a new mammal, man, and wish to decide where it belongs in their classification of terrestrial animals. “Being happily free,” he writes, “from all real, or imaginary, personal interest in the results of the inquiry thus set afoot, we should proceed to weigh the arguments on one side and on the other, with as much judicial calmness as if the question related to a new opossum.” The visiting scientists would have to conclude, Huxley says, that man belongs to the order of Primates. What is the evidence that this is so? Huxley displays it to us, carefully, calmly, and at length. It is not primarily to be found, he says, in the physiology of the brain, or in man’s special functions and productions. Rather, it consists in a comparison of structure, of morphology—in the structure of the hands and feet and pelvis, in the relative proportions of the limbs, and, perhaps most important of all, in the structure and number of the teeth. All of these elements of man’s physiognomy show, upon impartial and objective consideration, that man is less different from the higher apes than the higher apes are from the monkeys and lower primates. Since it is admitted that the apes and monkeys belong together and form one order of living things, then man belongs to it, too. Huxley is not denying that man’s place is at the top of nature. Nothing he says belittles or ignores the immense differences of another kind between man and all the other animals. But these differences, he says, are not the result, primarily, of structure and morphology. They are the result of language. Man’s larger brain may make language possible, but it does not guarantee it. Once man invents language, he makes strides forward that no other animal can match. On a Piece of Chalk is simpler and broader in its approach to a problem in the study of nature. We discover that the chalk which covers much of England and Europe must be the product of living animals in a long since dried-up sea. That sea must have lain over Europe for thousands—we would say millions—of years. The chalk is “vastly older,” Huxley says, “than Adam himself.” The question whether any natural thing could be “vastly older” than Adam was a serious question in Huxley’s day. For if nothing were, then it was difficult to see how the earth could be “the theatre of a series of changes as vast in their amount as they were slow in their progress.” But if the earth were really very old, then there was time for these vast changes to have occurred, and there was no need to have recourse to the hypothesis of a “grand catastrophe.” Huxley ends his lecture in a way that is reminiscent of the end of Faraday’s Chemical History of a Candle. Huxley suggests that a piece of chalk could be put “into the hot but obscure flame of burning hydrogen,” in which case “it would presently shine like the sun.” This would symbolize, he implies, what he has been trying to do in the lecture; but the symbol has a wider meaning than that. The chalk “has become luminous,” he writes, “and its clear rays, penetrating the abyss of the remote past, have brought within our ken some stages of the evolution of the earth.” Huxley’s final intention is to show how science shines its light on nature itself. Nature, submitted to the flame of thought, becomes luminous, and is brought within our ken.