Author: Tommaso Campanella Campanella, Italian philosopher, was born at Stilo, Calabria, in 1568. He became a member of the Dominican Order in 1582. The chance reading of a work of natural philosophy called De Rerum Natura by one Telesio is said to have changed his view of the world. Telesio’s work appealed to nature rather than to authority, and Campanella defended its author in a book titled Philosophy Demon strated According to the Senses (1591). This book, and his own opposition to the authorities, required his departure from Naples for Rome and other Italian cities in the following years. He returned to Naples in 1598 and was implicated, perhaps unjustly, in a plot to free the city from Spanish rule. He was convicted, sentenced to prison, and remained there for twenty-eight years. During this time he composed a sonnet series and most of his philosophical works, including the Defense of Galileo, from which the following selection is taken. Campanella never denied—indeed he always supported—the temporal power of the pope. On his release from prison, he found favor with Pope Urban VIII. The latter persuaded Campanella to go to Paris upon the outbreak of a new conspiracy. There he was well received by Cardinal Richelieu. Campanella died in Paris, while engaged in preparing a complete edition of his works, on May 21, 1639. Campanella was widely read in the scientific literature of his day. He rejected Aristotelianism in the study of man and nature, preferring instead direct recourse to the subject of inquiry. He accepted the authority of faith in matters of revealed theology, but he maintained that philosophy should be based on experience. In what is probably his most famous work, The City of the Sun (1623), he describes an ideal state, much influenced by Plato’s Republic, which is ruled by philosopher-priests. Is the philosophy which Galileo has made famous and important in harmony with or opposed to the Holy Scriptures?” asks Campanella in the Foreword to the Defense of Galileo. That is the prime question which concerns him in the following selection, and it should not surprise us, therefore, that he does not defend Galileo by asserting the “truth” of Galileo’s discoveries, in which Campanella probably believed. The question is, after all, not whether Galileo’s theories are true, but whether their truth, even if it exists, runs counter to what even Campanella would have insisted was a higher truth. For any Christian of the seventeenth century, Galileo not excepted, the assertion of propositions obviously or demonstrably contrary to Scripture would have been unthinkable. The question whether Galileo’s philosophy was in fact contrary to Scripture was, however, susceptible to argument, and Campanella discusses that question here. Though it is clear enough where his sympathies lie, it is noteworthy that he is careful to do full justice to the arguments of his opponents. And he counters them on their own terms. If they cite authority against Galileo, he cites authority for Copernicus, which is in effect authority for Galileo himself. If they cite Scripture, he cites Scripture in return. If they cite tradition, then he cites tradition in return. The argument is thus a proper one; the issue is truly joined. The same cannot be said of some of the controversies, however hotly waged, of our own day. Simply stated, the position of those who opposed Galileo was as follows: that Galileo asserted the truth, and not merely the hypothetical possibility, of the Copernican system; that this assertion involved the denial of Holy Writ; that this denial involved the denial of God; and that the denial of God involved the eternal damnation of the denier and, possibly, of the entire human race. The fact that the last three propositions are no longer held to follow from the first should not lead us to ignore the deadly seriousness of the matter. Indeed, within the last generation the question whether scientific advances involve the possible destruction of the entire human race has once again been raised. There are many persons of so-called liberal persuasion—persons, that is, who would have defended Galileo’s right to speak—who now advocate the control of science because of what it can and may do to man and the world. At the same time, modern states feel morally obliged, as the church did in Galileo’s time, to set limits on the freedom of scientific inquiry and on the communication of scientific knowledge. Though it is stated in an outmoded way, the question that Campanella asks is a perennial one. Should science be in the service of man? If so, and if it is allowed free reign, then its results may lead to the disservice of man. However, the restriction of science might also lead to the disservice of man. On the other hand, it is sometimes claimed that science is an end in itself, and that it is wrong to demand that it be in the service of anything else. It is not at all too much to say that Campanella’s arguments are capable of helping us to understand this great dilemma.