Author: Eve Curie Eve Curie was born in Paris in 1904, the daughter of Pierre and Marie Curie. She began early to study music, and though she received the degree of bachelor of science and philosophy from Sévigné College, she became a concert pianist. She made her debut at Paris in 1925 and subsequently played in many cities, chiefly in France. After her mother’s death she began collecting and classifying all the papers, manuscripts, and documents left by Mme Curie; she went to Poland to obtain material on her mother’s youth; and she interrogated all those friends and acquaintances of the scientist who could be reached. Her biography, titled Madame Curie, was published in 1937. It was described as one of the great biographies of our time and was translated into many languages. Eve Curie gave vigorous support to the activities of the Free French in World War II. She visited, as a correspondent, some of the most active battlefronts and wrote a book about her experiences called Journey Among Warriors (1943). She later became one of the publishers of the newspaper Paris Presse. With her husband, Henri Labouisse, she now resides in Washington, D.C. The Curie family would have delighted Galton, the author of Hereditary Genius. Pierre and Marie Curie received the Nobel Prize in physics for 1903, in association with Henri Becquerel, for the discovery of radiation. Mme Curie herself won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 1911, for the discovery of radium. Her daughter Irène, in association with the latter’s husband, Frédéric Joliot-Curie, won the Nobel Prize in chemistry for 1935, for their production of artificially induced radiation. And Eve Curie attained the first rank among biographers upon the publication of Madame Curie. If genius is hereditary in any family, it would appear to have been so in this one. Mme Curie not only received two Nobel Prizes; she also received innumerable other prizes and medals and was made a corresponding honorary member of almost every scientific society on earth. The curie, a unit of measurement for radium emanation, was named after her, as was the element curium. Despite this public acclaim (there were, however, also violent attacks on her), Mme Curie remained a simple, kind, almost timid woman. “Marie Curie is, of all celebrated beings,” said her lifelong friend Albert Einstein, “the only one whom fame has not corrupted.” The problem which thus faced her biographer was, though it might seem simple, in fact extremely complex and difficult. On the one hand, there was the temptation to do no more than recount the troubles and obstacles of Mme Curie’s youth, to tell how each of these was in turn overcome, to applaud the great discoveries, to describe the personal anguish, to narrate the series of triumphs, and to close with a rousing paean of praise. But the risk in that case was to create a cold and quite unbelievable character. On the other hand, Eve Curie might have been tempted to tell no more than a “human interest” story; she might have emphasized the naïveté of her subject. But the risk in this case was to fall into pathos and sentimentality. The young biographer of Mme Curie avoided both dangers. Eve Curie’s picture of her mother is as warm, as human, as paradoxical as the woman herself; but that woman is also a great scientist. In a short introduction to the book Eve Curie tells us how she managed to do this. “It would have been a crime,” she writes, “to add the slightest ornament to this story, so like a myth. I have not related a single anecdote of which I am not sure. I have not deformed a single essential phrase or so much as invented the color of a dress. The facts are as stated; the quoted words were actually pronounced.” In other words, she wrote about her mother’s life in much the same way that her mother wrote about her discoveries. Mme Curie did not add anything, either; she too was objective in the best sense, she too was patient and willing to allow the truth to speak for itself. Both of these remarkable women lend considerable credence to the proposition that truth is not only stranger than fiction but also much more interesting. It hardly needs saying that the chapter reprinted below, The Discovery of Radium, has the virtues of the whole book. Here is the story of Mme Curie in miniature. In particular, the reader is urged to note especially the three notebook entries quoted at the end of the chapter. Therein, the author seems to be saying, lies the essence of Marie Curie, who could be equally happy about the discovery of radium and about the fact that her daughter has fifteen teeth.