Author: William H. Prescott William Hickling Prescott was born of a well-to-do New England family in Salem, Massachusetts, on May 4, 1796. His grandfather, Colonel William Prescott, had commanded the Colonial troops in the Battle of Bunker Hill. His father was a well-known lawyer. While Prescott was at Harvard College, he was the victim of an accident that affected his entire later life. At the Commons dining hall, a fellow student threw a crust of bread across the table. It struck Prescott and blinded him in one eye. In spite of this he managed to complete his college education and was graduated with honors in 1814. He attempted after that to enter his father’s law office, but doctors both at home and abroad felt that he must preserve the dimming vision in his remaining eye. Prescott therefore withdrew from the law office and embarked on a literary career. He worked in a darkened study while assistants read aloud to him from source materials. He took notes with the help of a machine known as a noctograph, a frame with guide wires strung across it, which enabled him to write without running lines together. The assistant then read his notes back to him and Prescott committed them to memory. With the material firmly in his mind, he was able to shape and organize it during his everyday activities of walking or driving. His first book, a History of the Reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, established his fame as a historian. With this background in Spanish history, Prescott turned next to The Conquest of Mexico. This was followed by the History of the Conquest of Peru, both books being translated into many languages. Prescott was working on an ambitious history of Philip II of Spain when he suffered a stroke in 1858. He continued working until January 28, 1859, when he died of another stroke. Because of his infirmity, Prescott developed a memory for details as remarkable as Macaulay’s. In this vivid chapter from The Con quest of Mexico, one can almost believe that Prescott was there when the Spanish soldiers under Hernando Cortés descended the mountains into the Valley of Mexico. The scene they beheld was so beautiful that Prescott writes: “In the warm glow of their feelings, they cried out ‘It is the promised land!’” It was the island city of Tenochtitlán, or Mexico City, set in the midst of glimmering lakes. So explicit is Prescott’s description that it is hard to realize that it was never seen by Prescott. Within a generation after Cortés conquered Mexico, this city was wrecked, its gardens destroyed, and the retreating waters had left desolate swamps behind. Prescott’s account is based entirely on eyewitness records of the conquest, but it is as glowing as if he had been there himself. The beauty, art, and wealth of the great Inca capital, which make the conquistadors themselves uneasily aware that they face more than ignorant savages, were to be ruthlessly destroyed or shipped to Spain. The tragic loss is felt throughout Prescott’s book. In an early chapter he says: “The difficulty that meets us in the outset is, to find a justification of the right of conquest at all.” On the other hand, he concedes that the Spaniards’ zeal to convert the heathen Indians may have been as strong a motive as their personal greed and ambition. Prescott shows us that the Aztec Empire was in its death throes. Montezuma, the product of generations of Aztec warrior kings, awaits Cortés in a paralysis of fear. Knowing the Spaniard can be merciless, he is yet incapable of a resolute defense. The Emperor prays now for his aged and feeble citizens and wonders how to protect them. He is lord of a domain which stretches from the Atlantic to the Pacific. Outlying cities pay unwilling tribute to his capital; young men and women are sent as human sacrifices to his gods. It is fatal for an empire to overextend itself, Gibbon said. Is this what the Aztecs have done? The cities which were conquered by Montezuma’s ancestors are restless under his tyranny. But the gods Montezuma worships demand greater and greater sacrifices, which means more and more conquest. Like the Romans, too, Montezuma and his noblemen have been softened by their own luxurious civilization. Only one prince wants to fight the Spaniards; the others want to treat with them, to bribe them to go away. Perhaps the Aztec Empire is declining, perhaps the warrior princes have lost faith in their own religion. They may have viewed Cortés and his men as another species of god. Certainly the horses and guns, which had never been seen before, evoked awe and consternation. Somehow a handful of Spaniards had been able to overthrow a rich and numerous nation, and to bring an end to a whole civilization. The Spaniards were favored by a more advanced military art. They also knew exactly what they wanted, and were single and united in their purpose under Cortés, whereas the Indians were sadly divided. Was this perhaps the decisive factor? Could the Spaniards have succeeded against a united country? We can also ask ourselves whether the British could have conquered India without substantial aid from the Indians themselves? As we read history, we naturally form hypotheses. What is yours?