Author: Plutarch The Greek biographer and philosopher Plutarch was born in Chaeronea in Boeotia. Little is known of his life, and not all of that is strictly reliable. He studied in Athens under Ammonius Saccas, the founder of Neoplatonism, and later lectured on philosophy in Rome. It is reported that the emperor Trajan gave him consular rank and that later the emperor Hadrian made him procurator of Greece. It is known, in any case, that he returned to his native Boeotia, where he officiated as a priest of Apollo at Delphi, and it was there that he died. A letter to his wife on the death of their only daughter has been preserved. Plutarch consoles her for her loss in tender and high-minded words and speaks of the four sons who remain to them and need their care. The fame of Plutarch rests largely on his Parallel Lives, in which he recounted the lives and fortunes of forty-six Greek and Roman statesmen and military leaders. Each Roman hero is paired with a Greek hero who is parallel to him in merits and in the odds he faced. He makes a close comparison of the abilities and moral excellence of the Greek hero with his Roman counterpart, which was a useful thing for a Greek to do at this time, when Greek influence was often resented in Rome. Those who wish to investigate will find that the Greeks come off very well in the comparison. The influence of the Parallel Lines has been immense, but it would be difficult to trace because it is so often taken for granted. It was read for pleasure and instruction by most eminent writers and by statesmen when they were literate, and some learned all they knew about Plato and Aristotle from the absorbing biographies of Plutarch. Platonic ideas of the virtues and nobility proper to princes and generals were thus painlessly infused. As a girl Queen Elizabeth I read North’s new English translation of the Lives with delight. Shakespeare took history, plots, and characters from North’s translation, as in Julius Caesar, Coriolanus, and Antony and Cleo patra, and in the last play adopted some passages, including one long one, almost without a change. The Lives has not only proved a rich source for literature but also for the history of the classic world. The essay that follows is from Plutarch’s Moralia, which consists of about sixty essays dealing with a great variety of topics, mostly ethical. The treatment of even abstract subjects is concrete and pictorial: we are given one episode after another to illustrate the point. The frequent quotations from Greek dramatists, and from poems which are otherwise irretrievably lost, are an added attraction. The essay which you are to read, like the others, is packed with anecdotes. If this seems surprising to you, try to think of a better way of putting across ethical ideas. Suppose you were going to maintain that lack of anger is a worse fault than truculence, or too much anger. You could give your reasons, but to convince your listener you would be obliged to give instances and illustrations or anecdotes. Anecdotes, Plutarch said, throw a sudden light on a man’s character, rendering his “natural dispositions more plain than the famous battles won, wherein are slain ten thousand men.” Montaigne and Francis Bacon were greatly influenced by the anecdotal style of Plutarch’s essays. The essay form itself owes a great deal to his example. Plutarch’s essay Of Bashfulness is an ingenious development of Aristotle’s theory that the virtues are means between extremes—between passions which are both vicious. In the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle points out that both shamelessness and bashfulness are disapproved, and yet the modest man is praised. This is because the bashful man “is ashamed of everything,” and the shameless man “is not ashamed of anything.” In between these extremes is the modest man, who is ashamed on the proper occasions, for the right reasons, and in an appropriate degree. Out of this abstract analysis comes all Plutarch’s rich elaboration. He is particularly concerned to show the evils that flow from bashfulness. If you have always regarded too little shame as a worse fault than too much, you may well change your mind before you have finished this essay. You may even discover that you are a little inclined toward bashfulness yourself. Consider some of the marks of bashfulness given by Plutarch. Do you lend money to a friend who importunes you, though you yourself are short and know that you will be embarrassed later? Do you invite a man to your party when he brings up the subject, though you know he will spoil things for other guests? Is it hard to say No? Or, when seriously ill, do you send for the best doctor available in town, or do you call in a doctor friend who would otherwise be offended? And what do you say when your friend reads you his poem which is wretched, and waits for your praise? More important than anything else—are you developing your talents and prospects sufficiently, or do you hate to push yourself forward and to be conspicuous? “Too much anxiety and timidity lest we may do wrong,” Plutarch says, “is also to be avoided; because many men have become cowards and been deterred from generous undertakings.” Fear of malice and envy, as well as the dangers and difficulties, holds them back. In reading this essay you will find a number of names you do not know but do not be disturbed. You can find most of them in the Index of the Lives and the rest in a classical dictionary.