Author: Jean Henri Fabre J.Henri Fabre was born at St. Léons, in southern France, in 1823, the son of humble parents who could afford to give him only an elementary education. He studied at the normal school at Vaucluse, supporting himself, and became a teacher. He took a position in Corsica but had to leave it when he contracted malaria. In 1852 he began to teach at Avignon, where he remained for 20 years. During this period his salary never exceeded $320 a year. His ideas on pedagogy were in advance of his time; when he finally admitted girls to his science classes he was denounced and dismissed from his post. He was ejected, with his wife and five children, from his home, and was saved only by a loan from John Stuart Mill, with whom he had made a number of botanical excursions. Fabre now retired from teaching and supported himself by writing books of popular science. He paid back the loan and, after nine years, in 1879, bought the first piece of land he had ever owned. Its two and one-half sandy, scrubby acres, and his joy in their acquisition, are described in the first of the selections that follow. Here, at Sérignan, he gathered together the notes of a quarter of a century and began to produce his great work, the Souvenirs entomologiques, whose ten volumes were not completed till 1907. His laboratory, fitted with the most primitive equipment, gave evidence of his extraordinary industry. Not only were there the ten volumes, comprising 2,500 pages and 850,000 words, but in the floor of the laboratory a path had been worn in the tiles by Fabre as he circled his table in his heavy peasant shoes. Upon the completion of his Souvenirs, Fabre, who had worked in almost total obscurity, was suddenly discovered by the leading literary figures of the time. He was showered with homage, and a jubilee in his honor was held at Sérignan in 1910, when he was 86. He was nearly blind, and he was hardly able to recognize the President of France who had journeyed from Paris to pay his respects. Fabre died at Sérignan, saddened by the war that had overwhelmed his beloved country, on October 11, 1915. Here, surely—and the list is far from complete—is a company both numerous and select, whose conversation will not fail to charm my solitude, if I succeed in drawing it out.” Thus Fabre describes the insect population of his little farm at Sérignan, his “abandoned, barren, sun-scorched bit of land, favored by thistles and by wasps and bees.” It has been doubted whether any man ever appreciated such a worthless piece of land more. For Fabre, it was certainly not worthless. It was, in his words, “a laboratory in the open fields.” And it was in a laboratory, whether open or enclosed, that he was happiest. Despite the suffering of his life, Fabre gives the impression of being one of the happiest men who ever lived. He who loves insects is fortunate, for there are so many of them. To Fabre, of course, insects were not what they are to most people. Each was almost an individual; certainly each species was distinct. It is said that he overemphasized the importance of instinct in insect life. He thought wasps and bees were more limited in their freedom to adapt to circumstances than certain modern entomologists believe. But he came to his conclusions as a result of observation so patient and painstaking that it almost seems incredible. The Sacred Beetle, the second selection reprinted here, is, as its title suggests, about one kind of insect rather than many. The scarab, or dung-beetle (the nearest American relative is the june-bug), was one of Fabre’s favorite insects. He spent nearly half a century studying this thieving, lazy, but also unbelievably industrious little animal. He seemed never to grow tired of dung-beetles, nor did he, evidently, ever become unaware of how funny the fact might appear to some people. “What excitement over a single patch of cow-dung!” he writes, knowing full well that the reader will smile not only at the beetle’s enthusiasm, but at the author’s, too. To Fabre the beetle’s world was part of that “most wonderful of festivals, life’s springtime awakening.” Life, any kind of life, no matter how humble, was to Fabre a festival. Others might think this silly or sad, but he could only watch and wonder. Fabre’s scientific purity must be defended. He appears, from one point of view, to interject too much human morality into his history of the dung-beetle. “These dung-rollers rob one another with a calm effrontery which, to my knowledge, is without a parallel,” he writes. The beetle’s “breach of trust rouses (his) indignation,” and he observes that, in general, “the insect cares for nothing but itself.” But it is also apparent that his moralizing is done with tongue in cheek. In fact, he seems to accept the dung-beetle for what it is and makes no judgments for or against. He loves the insect in that sense—he does not want to change it. Fabre is a naturalist. What he observes, he studies in the round, as a whole. “To know thoroughly the history of the destroyer of our vines,” he writes, “might perhaps be more important than to know how this or that nerve-fibre of a Cirriped ends.” His is a laboratory of “living entomology,” and his data are histories, not isolated facts. He does not seek for causes; it is enough for him that he discover what happens, not how it happens. That can come later, he seems to imply, when patient men like him have done their work.