Author: Alexis De Tocqueville Undoubtedly the most illustrious of all political analysts since Aristotle and Machiavelli.” This is the way Wilhelm Dilthey, the famous German philosopher, describes Alexis de Tocqueville. It is an estimate with which many philosophers and political scientists would agree. Alexis Charles Henri Maurice Clérel de Tocqueville was born in Verneuil on July 29, 1805. His family had been part of the French nobility prior to the Revolution of 1789, and he grew up in an atmosphere where the aristocratic values had been preserved. He received much of his early education at home, and at eighteen took up the study of law. When he was twenty-one, he became a magistrate at Versailles under the government of Charles X. Charles’s government was toppled by the Revolution of 1830, and Tocqueville sought some way to dissociate himself from the new government without appearing disloyal. Along with his close friend Gustave de Beaumont, he petitioned the government for a commission to survey the penal institutions in America. The prison survey was only a pretext. His primary aim was to view at first hand the democratic system as it operated in the United States. The commission was granted, and he and Beaumont sailed for America, arriving in New York City in May, 1831. From there they began a tour that took them as far north as Canada and as far south as New Orleans. They traveled more than seven thousand miles by steamer, stagecoach, and horseback before returning to France the following February. Once the report on American prisons was completed, Tocqueville turned to the work that was the real purpose of his travels—Democ racy in America. The first part appeared in 1835. It was received with great enthusiasm and soon was translated into several languages. The second part appeared in 1840. It was also well received, but it did not generate as much excitement as its predecessor. In commenting on the complete work, John Stuart Mill said that it constituted “the beginning of a new era in the science of politics.” The success of Democracy in America advanced Tocqueville to the front rank of French political thinkers. He was honored widely and eventually was persuaded to return to politics. He was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in 1839, where he remained until 1851. Then, withdrawing from public life, he began preparing the work that many consider his masterpiece, L’Ancien Régime et la Révolu tion. Its first volume, published in 1856, was even more successful than Democracy in America. Unfortunately, ill-health prevented him from completing the other volumes. He died in Cannes at the age of fifty-three. Democracy in America is one of the most remarkable books ever written. Based upon observations made by a twenty-six-year-old man during a period of only nine months, it has never been surpassed as an analysis of American society. Even today, more than one hundred and thirty years after Tocqueville visited the United States, it is still one of the best commentaries available on American institutions, practices, beliefs, and attitudes. One of the reasons why Democracy in America has been of such lasting value is that Tocqueville was not so much interested in America as in democracy. Of all the nations that were then being transformed into democracies, the United States was the one in which the development of democracy had been “most peaceful and most complete.” By comparing what he knew of other societies with what he observed in America, Tocqueville could see the effects of democracy upon social institutions and upon the lives and characters of men. He took great pains to distinguish between the effects that seemed to be characteristic of democracy in general and those that were peculiar to American democracy. As a result, he was able to see below the surface of American society to its underlying principles and tendencies. Tocqueville’s great interest in democratic societies stemmed from his conviction that democracy was the wave of the future; the movement towards it was “universal” and “irresistible.” The democratic revolution was already under way in Europe, and its outcome was anticipated with fear by some, with hope by others. These hopes and fears were, in almost every instance, based upon ignorance. Tocqueville’s aim was to provide his countrymen (and other Europeans) with the truth about democracy, its “evils and the advantages.” He elaborated upon his purpose in a letter to a friend: “I wished to show what a democratic people really was in our day…. To those who have fancied an ideal democracy, a brilliant and easily realized dream, I endeavored to show that they had clothed the picture in false colors…. To those for whom the word democracy is synonymous with destruction, anarchy, spoliation, and murder, I have tried to show that under a democratic government the fortunes and rights of society may be respected, liberty preserved, and religion honored.” Because of space limitations, only part of Democracy in America is reprinted here. The complete work covers almost every important aspect of American life, and the high level of observation and analysis is sustained throughout.