Author: Thomas Paine Thomas Paine was born in Norfolk, England, where his father was a Quaker corset maker. Working hard as a sailor, teacher, and exciseman until 1762, and then as a government customs official, he developed a hearty and lasting sympathy with the poor. In 1774 Benjamin Franklin, then in London, persuaded him to migrate to America, and gave him letters of introduction to influential men. On his arrival, he became the editor of the Pennsylvania Magazine. In January of 1776, he wrote a pamphlet called Common Sense, which, as George Washington said, “worked a powerful change in the minds of many men.” By July the ground had been prepared for the signing of The Declaration of Independence. During the Revolutionary War, Paine was a volunteer aide-decamp to General Greene, and at this time wrote the first of a series of articles which were later published as The Crisis. This, too, had an enormous effect on American opinion. In recognition of his services Paine was granted an estate in New Rochelle, New York, Congress voted him gifts of money, and he was offered various government positions. In 1787 Paine sailed for England to exhibit one of his inventions—a pierless iron bridge. He soon fell to writing his The Rights of Man, which was an answer to Edmund Burke’s famous Reflections on the Revolution in France. When Paine’s book appeared it created so great a stir that the British government did its best to suppress it. In 1792 Paine was indicted for treason, but luckily escaped to France before the trial. He was made a member of the French Revolutionary Convention, but he antagonized Robespierre by opposing the execution of Louis XVI, and was imprisoned. After Robespierre’s death, Paine was released and reinstated in the Convention. His Age of Reason, the first part of which appeared in 1794, infuriated conservatives everywhere. But Jefferson took care that it was circulated in the United States and, announcing that its principles were his own, was elected President in 1800. An acrimonious letter to George Washington, however, made Paine many enemies. When he returned to America in 1802 he was coldly received, and lived on his New York estate in obscurity until his death in 1809. The first issue of The Crisis is written with fire and logical precision. “These are the times that try men’s souls,” Paine begins. “The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country.” But he who stands firm will deserve the gratitude of all. As he wrote, the seasoned British armies were advancing, and the untrained patriots had suffered cruel reverses. The colonies were not giving united support to the defending troops. Thousands of Tories were lending open or secret aid to the British, and spreading rumors which weakened morale and disrupted military operations. The time had passed when such men could be blandly tolerated. Every Tory, Paine declared, “is a coward, for a servile, slavish, self-interested fear is the foundation of Toryism.” He denounces those who are hostile, fearful, or lukewarm to the American cause, but he never ceases to reason with them. Would they not fight off a robber who broke into their house? Is it any different when a “stupid, stubborn, worthless, brutish” king seeks to bend them to his absolute will? And can they expect mercy from a man who has refused to do justice? Are they not like the Tory innkeeper who prefers to see peace in his day, than live to see it in his child’s day? What should we think, Paine asks, of a colony that came to terms with the Indians, and left other colonies exposed to massacre? Is the case any different when the Hessians and British are the invaders? A colony that surrenders to the British will fare worse than the rest. His arguments multiply. But there is a limit to tolerance. The Tories who will not listen to reason must be driven from the country. And this, as we know, is what happened to many. Far more were persuaded by Paine’s appeal to stand by their fighting countrymen. Paine was universally acclaimed for his wartime pamphlets. His later writings are more controversial, and raised up legions of enemies both in England and in America. Did the fault lie in his character—his truculence? He was clearly not a diplomat like Franklin, nor a conservative like Hamilton. It is hard to see how he could have strenuously campaigned for republicanism, toleration, freedom of speech, and equal rights for all men without incurring the wrath of many important people. Enemies are often proof of a man’s sincerity and striking force. The graduated income tax and other tax reforms favoring the poor which Paine advocated, though long since adopted in the United States, were far ahead of his time. Prime Minister Pitt agreed privately that Paine was right, but was quoted as saying: “If I were to encourage Tom Paine’s opinions, we should have a bloody revolution.” He had Paine indicted for treason. Paine, like his friend Jefferson, went further than his contemporaries in espousing democracy. Edmund Burke, though he had defended the American Revolution, could not abide the French Revolution. In his Reflections, he carried his opposition to the impious doings of the French so far that it became a denial of the democratic principle itself. The people of England, “utterly disclaim the right to choose their own governors,” he wrote, and “they will resist the practical assertion of it with their lives and fortunes.” Paine writes in The Rights of Man: “That men should take up arms and spend their lives and fortunes, not to maintain their rights, but to maintain that they have not rights” is, he says, very queer indeed. Perhaps, then, Paine made enemies because he was too advanced and consistent a democrat. Could it be also that he was needlessly shocking and provocative; or were the shock and provocation needed?