Author: Virginia Woolf The Art of Biography is not a manual for biographers, any more than Lucian’s The Way to Write History is a manual for historians. Both raise more questions than they answer. This is particularly true of Mrs. Woolf’s essay, which, despite its title, is concerned to ask whether biography can be considered an art at all. But if it is not an art, Virginia Woolf wonders, is it then a science? Or if not that, a craft? Great English biographies did not appear, she says, until the later eighteenth century—long after there were great poets, novelists, and other literary artists. She seems to consider only three biographers as of the highest class: Johnson, for his Lives of the English Poets; Boswell, for his Life of Johnson; and John Gibson Lockhart, for his Life of Sir Walter Scott. Why are great biographies so rare? The answer, says Mrs. Woolf, lies in the limitations of the genre itself. The biographer is caught in a kind of trap. If he decides to be bound by such facts about his subject as he can discover from written records and from his subject’s friends and relations, he soon discovers that there are gaps in the story that must either be left unfilled or be filled by his own intuitions and knowledge of general human nature. On the other hand, if he decides to “create,” in an artistic sense, a unified, meaningful character out of his subject, he will find that this character is in some cases, at least, contradicted by the facts. It is the biographer’s misfortune, she suggests, that something is known about everybody, but not everything about anybody. The biographer is thus limited in his use of facts, and frustrated in the use of his imagination. In addition to this, Virginia Woolf points out, popular opinion about great men is bound to change. The reader of Macaulay’s essay on Machiavelli or Carlyle’s on Cromwell will not fail to see that different generations have different views of the same men. The biographer “must go ahead of the rest of us…. His sense of truth must be alive and on tiptoe.” But since this is so, she is saying, biography cannot be called a science. There remains the question whether biography can be called an art. Even such superb biographies as Boswell’s Johnson cannot, Virginia Woolf says, be compared with Shakespeare’s characterization of Falstaff, for example, or Dickens’ portrait of Mr. Micawber. The poet or novelist is free. Biography, on the other hand, is too restricted by facts to be a creative art. Is this not an exaggeration? Was Shakespeare free in creating Falstaff? In combining his traits he had to preserve plausibility, and make him fit in with the other characters of Henry IV. And once he had created this lovable rascal, he was bound to see that he continued to act in character. The poet is not entirely free, then, nor the biographer completely bound by facts. Are there not gaps in any life which must be creatively supplied by the biographer? These are questions that are likely to occur to you. But Mrs. Woolf is persuasive. She is also disarming when she admits that, though biography is not an art, the biographer “does more to stimulate the imagination than any poet or novelist save the very greatest.”