continue..
walk, whether I eat or whether I play billiards, is a matter to be discussed only by persons of understanding and of mature years. Varya (enraged). You dare say that to me—you dare? You mean to say I’ve no understanding? Get out of here at once! This minute! Yepihodov (scared). I beg you to express yourself delicately. Varya (beside herself). Clear out this minute! Out with you! yepihodov goes towards the door, varya following . Varya. Two-and-Twenty Troubles! Get out—don’t let me set eyes on you! Exit yepihodov . His voice is heard behind the door: “I shall lodge a complaint against you!” Varya. Oh, you’re coming back? (She seizes the stick left near door by firs.) Well, come then…come…I’ll show you…Ah, you’re coming? You’re coming?…Come…(Swings the stick just as lopahin enters.) Lopahin. Thank you kindly. Varya (angrily and mockingly). I’m sorry. Lopahin. It’s nothing. Thank you kindly for your charming reception. Varya. Don’t mention it. (Walks away, looks back and asks softly.) I didn’t hurt you, did I? Lopahin. Oh, no, not at all. I shall have a large bump, though. Voices from the ballroom. Lopahin is here! Lopahin! Enter pishchik . Pishchik. My eyes do see, my ears do hear! (Kisses lopahin.) Lopahin. You smell of cognac, my dear friends. And we’ve been celebrating here, too. Enter mme . ranevskaya . Mme. Ranevskaya. Is that you, Yermolay Alexeyevich? What kept you so long? Where’s Leonid? Lopahin. Leonid Andreyevich arrived with me. He’s coming. Mme. Ranevskaya. Well, what happened? Did the sale take place? Speak! Lopahin (embarrassed, fearful of revealing his joy). The sale was over at four o’clock. We missed the train—had to wait till half past nine. (Sighing heavily.) Ugh. I’m a little dizzy. Enter gayev . In his right hand he holds parcels, with his left he is wiping away his tears. Mme. Ranevskaya. Well, Leonid? What news? (Impatiently, through tears.) Be quick, for God’s sake! Gayev (not answering, simply waves his hand. Weeping, to firs). Here, take these; anchovies, Kerch herrings…I haven’t eaten all day. What I’ve been through! (The click of billiard balls comes through the open door of the billiard room and yasha’s voice is heard: “Seven and eighteen!” gayev’s expression changes, he no longer weeps.) I’m terribly tired. Firs, help me change. (Exits, followed by firs.) Pishchik. How about the sale? Tell us what happened. Mme. Ranevskaya. Is the cherry orchard sold? Lopahin. Sold. Mme. Ranevskaya. Who bought it? Lopahin. I bought it. Pause. mme . ranevskaya is overcome . She would fall to the floor were it not for the chair and table near which she stands. varya takes the keys from her belt, flings them on the floor in the middle of the drawing room and goes out . Lopahin. I bought it. Wait a bit, ladies and gentlemen, please, my head is swimming, I can’t talk. (Laughs.) We got to the auction and Deriganov was there already. Leonid Andreyevich had only 15,000 and straight off Deriganov bid 30,000 over and above the mortgage. I saw how the land lay, got into the fight, bid 40,000. He bid 45,000. I bid fifty-five. He kept adding five thousands, I ten. Well…it came to an end. I bid ninety above the mortgage and the estate was knocked down to me. Now the cherry orchard’s mine! Mine! (Laughs up roariously.) Lord! God in Heaven! The cherry orchard’s mine! Tell me that I’m drunk—out of my mind—that it’s all a dream. (Stamps his feet.) Don’t laugh at me! If my father and my grandfather could rise from their graves and see all that has happened—how their Yermolay, who used to be flogged, their half-literate Yermolay, who used to run about barefoot in winter, how that very Yermolay has bought the most magnificent estate in the world. I bought the estate where my father and grandfather were slaves, where they weren’t even allowed to enter the kitchen. I’m asleep—it’s only a dream—I only imagine it…. It’s the fruit of your imagination, wrapped in the darkness of the unknown! (Picks up the keys, smiling genially.) She threw down the keys, wants to show she’s no longer mistress here. (Jingles keys.) Well, no matter. (The band is heard tuning up.) Hey, musicians! Strike up! I want to hear you! Come, everybody, and see how Yermolay Lopahin will lay the ax to the cherry orchard and how the trees will fall to the ground. We will build summer cottages there, and our grandsons and great-grandsons will see a new life here. Music! Strike up! The band starts to play. mme . ranevskaya has sunk into a chair and is weeping bitterly . Lopahin (reproachfully). Why, why didn’t you listen to me? My dear friend, my poor friend, you can’t bring it back now. (Tearfully.) Oh, if only this were over quickly! Oh, if only our wretched, disordered life were changed! Pishchik (takes him by the arm; sotto voce). She’s crying. Let’s go into the ballroom. Let her be alone. Come. (Takes his arm and leads him into the ballroom.) Lopahin. What’s the matter? Musicians, play so I can hear you! Let me have things the way I want them. (Ironically.) Here comes the new master, the owner of the cherry orchard. (Accidentally he trips over a little table, almost upsetting the candelabra.) I can pay for everything. (Exits with pishchik. mme. ranevskaya, alone, sits huddled up, weeping bitterly. Music plays softly. Enter anya and trofimov quickly, anya goes to her mother and falls on her knees before her. trofimov stands in the doorway.) Anya. Mamma, Mamma, you’re crying! Dear, kind, good Mamma, my precious, I love you, I bless you! The cherry orchard is sold, it’s gone, that’s true, quite true. But don’t cry, Mamma, life is still before you, you still have your kind, pure heart. Let us go, let us go away from here, darling. We will plant a new orchard, even more luxuriant than this one. You will see it, you will understand, and like the sun at evening, joy—deep, tranquil joy—will sink into your soul, and you will smile, Mamma. Come, darling, let us go.