Work: “Arguments for and Against Galileo” fromThe Defense of Galileo Field: arguments for and against galileo Author: Tommaso Campanella Title: THE ARGUMENTS WHICH SUPPORT GALILEO 1. I mention first that De Revolutionibus Orbium Caelestium Libri VI, which Copernicus grounded upon observations of the heavens made in 1525, was presented for publication by respected and reputable theologians. By this act they expressed a judgment that the book contains nothing inimical to Catholic faith, despite the fact that it argues for the motion of the earth, the immobility of the firmament, and places the sun in the center of the starry heaven. Galileo has made no additions to the system advanced by Copernicus, and if the Revolutions does not adversely affect Catholic faith, neither does the work of Galileo. 2. Pope Paul III, to whom Copernicus dedicated the Revolutions, approved the book. Likewise did the Cardinal [Schonberg], who, as the prefatory epistle shows, begged to have the unprinted manuscript transcribed at his own expense. At the time of Paul III distinguished genius flourished within the church, and the Pontiff summoned from afar men of ability, spirit, and noble mind, and supported and adorned them with honor. It indeed would be strange if such able men had imitated blind moles by rejecting Copernicus. Our contemporaries who oppose his theory are not so great in reputation. I add that Galileo, who seeks always more precise observations, has [with the telescope] sharper eyes than Argus. 3. After Copernicus had published the Revolutions, Erasmus Reinhold, John Stadius, Michael Maestlin, Christopher Rothmann and many others accepted his theory. Later astronomers thought themselves unable to prepare accurate ephemerides unless they employed the calculations of Copernicus. They also found themselves wholly at a loss to explain celestial motions without violation of mathematical principles and in harmony with the judgment of reason and of all people, unless they employed the Copernican hypothesis. Nor is the heliocentric theory as recent as Copernicus. As the result of his observations of celestial phenomena, Francesco [Domenico] Maria of Ferrara previously had taught that a new system of astronomy should be constructed. His disciple Copernicus built this system. 4. The learned Cardinal Cusanus accepted the hypothesis, and acknowledged that other suns and planets move in orbits in the starry heaven. Nolanus [Bruno], whose errors cannot be named, also supported the theory, as did other philosophers. (Nor were the heretics so much condemned for upholding the hypothesis; rather, Catholics were forbidden to read their books.) Outstanding among Copernican advocates is John Kepler, mathematician to the Emperor, who defends the theory in his prefatory dissertation to the Starry Messenger of Galileo. I also may add to them William Gilbert, in his On the Magnet, and innumerable other Englishmen. Giovanni Antonio Magini, mathematician of Padua, declared in his Ephemerides from 1581 to the present year of 1616 that he accepted the calculations and positions set forth by Copernicus and Reinhold. He boldly criticized other cosmological theories in many of his letters. 5. For more than thirty years the Jesuit and Aristotelian, Reverend Father Clavius, supported the Ptolemaic hypothesis. When he observed however that the planets Mercury and Venus revolve about the sun, he advised astronomers in the final edition of his Works that some system other than the Ptolemaic must be sought. One recent astronomer, Fictus Apelles, gave serious consideration to this admonition, and as a result of both the warning and his observation of spots on the sun, looked with favor upon the hypothesis of Galileo and Copernicus. 6. Galileo’s theory of the motion of the earth, of a central sun, and of the systems of stars with waters and earthly elements is indeed an ancient conception. It comes from the mouth of Moses himself, and from Pythagoras. Saint Ambrose tells us that although Pythagoras was born in a Grecian city, he was a Jew with Moses. He taught disciples in Greece, and after going into Italy, in Crotona of Calabria. His beliefs [later] were attacked by Aristotle, not with mathematical demonstrations, but with inane reasons and moralistic, rustic conjectures. According to the statements of Giovanni Pico della Mirandola and Saint Ambrose, Aristotle condemned Pythagoras in the same fashion as he condemned the Books of Moses. He was unable by syllogistic logic to understand their divine mystery, recondite thought, and sublime majesty. Such an attack upon Moses vindicates our great Galileo from similar insults cast by the Greeks. As not only Ovid, but as many historians declare, Numa Pompilius, disciple of Pythagoras and the wisest emperor of Rome, supported the hypothesis. Pliny truthfully states, despite the denial of some writers, that having been commanded by the oracle of Delphos to erect and dedicate a statue to the wisest of the Greeks, the Roman Senate dedicated a statue to Pythagoras and named him the most learned of the philosophers. Those who blacken the doctrine and scientific method of Galileo defame Moses, Rome, and Italy. They set Aristotle above Pythagoras at a time when long-buried truth is gleaming forth. But this is not our greatest sin; this sin is that we have neither made known the new earths, the new systems in the heavens, and the new celestial phenomena, nor have declared abroad the harmony of Scripture and Copernican philosophy. 7. From the time of Caselli and Francesco Maria of Ferrara until the present, theologians did not condemn Copernican astronomy. Moreover, reputable men ordered that the Revolutions be printed. Such theologians are not fewer today. The traducers of Galileo have fomented insurrection, not because of their zeal for the teaching of Christ, but from ignorance and jealousy. 8. Because heaven is immobile, Holy Scripture names it the firmament. The earth therefore must rotate, and the sun stand in the center of the world. As Copernicus and his followers prove and the followers of Ptolemy now admit, this system explains all phenomena and accords with all principles of mathematics. 9. The spots on the sun, the new stars in the heavens, and comets above the moon demonstrate clearly that the stars are worlds constructed of material substance. 10. It is not possible to explain correctly and satisfactorily the text of Moses unless the stars are so constructed. We prove this below from the most saintly Fathers. 11. In his Answers to the Orthodox, St. Justin teaches us that when controversy regarding the shape and movement of heaven arose between Christians and heathen, the heathen declared heaven was spherical and mobile, and the Christians that it was a vault which stood immobile. Many Fathers of the Church describe heaven as the firmament because it is unmoved.