continue..
gradually change the position of one of the crystals by rotating it. This statement makes sense only if the position of the axis about which the rotation takes place is fixed. We shall take as an axis the line determined by the incoming ray. This means that we displace all the points of the one crystal except those on the axis. A strange thing happens! The light gets weaker and weaker until it vanishes completely. It reappears as the rotation continues and we regain the initial view when the initial position is reached. Without going into the details of this and similar experiments we can ask the following question: can these phenomena be explained if the light waves are longitudinal? In the case of longitudinal waves the particles of the ether would move along the axis, as the beam does. If the crystal rotates, nothing along the axis changes. The points on the axis do not move, and only a very small displacement takes place nearby. No such distinct change as the vanishing and appearance of a new picture could possibly occur for a longitudinal wave. This and many other similar phenomena can be explained only by the assumption that light waves are transverse and not longitudinal! Or, in other words, the “jelly-like” character of the ether must be assumed. This is very sad! We must be prepared to face tremendous difficulties in the attempt to describe the ether mechanically. Ether and the Mechanical View. The discussion of all the various attempts to understand the mechanical nature of the ether as a medium for transmitting light, would make a long story. A mechanical construction means, as we know, that the substance is built up of particles with forces acting along lines connecting them and depending only on the distance. In order to construct the ether as a jelly-like mechanical substance physicists had to make some highly artificial and unnatural assumptions. We shall not quote them here; they belong to the almost forgotten past. But the result was significant and important. The artificial character of all these assumptions, the necessity for introducing so many of them all quite independent of each other, was enough to shatter the belief in the mechanical point of view. But there are other and simpler objections to ether than the difficulty of constructing it. Ether must be assumed to exist everywhere, if we wish to explain optical phenomena mechanically. There can be no empty space if light travels only in a medium. Yet we know from mechanics that interstellar space does not resist the motion of material bodies. The planets, for example, travel through the ether-jelly without encountering any resistance such as a material medium would offer to their motion. If ether does not disturb matter in its motion, there can be no interaction between particles of ether and particles of matter. Light passes through ether and also through glass and water, but its velocity is changed in the latter substances. How can this fact be explained mechanically? Apparently only by assuming some interaction between ether particles and matter particles. We have just seen that in the case of freely moving bodies such interactions must be assumed not to exist. In other words, there is interaction between ether and matter in optical phenomena, but none in mechanical phenomena! This is certainly a very paradoxical conclusion! There seems to be only one way out of all these difficulties. In the attempt to understand the phenomena of nature from the mechanical point of view, throughout the whole development of science up to the twentieth century, it was necessary to introduce artificial substances like electric and magnetic fluids, light corpuscles, or ether. The result was merely the concentration of all the difficulties in a few essential points, such as ether in the case of optical phenomena. Here all the fruitless attempts to construct an ether in some simple way, as well as the other objections, seem to indicate that the fault lies in the fundamental assumption that it is possible to explain all events in nature from a mechanical point of view. Science did not succeed in carrying out the mechanical program convincingly, and today no physicist believes in the possibility of its fulfillment. In our short review of the principal physical ideas we have met some unsolved problems, have come upon difficulties and obstacles which discouraged the attempts to formulate a uniform and consistent view of all the phenomena of the external world. There was the unnoticed clue in classical mechanics of the equality of gravitational and inertial mass. There was the artificial character of the electric and magnetic fluids. There was, in the interaction between electric current and magnetic needle, an unsolved difficulty. It will be remembered that this force did not act in the line connecting the wire and the magnetic pole, and depended on the velocity of the moving charge. The law expressing its direction and magnitude was extremely complicated. And finally, there was the great difficulty with the ether. Modern physics has attacked all these problems and solved them. But in the struggle for these solutions new and deeper problems have been created. Our knowledge is now wider and more profound than that of the physicist of the nineteenth century, but so are our doubts and difficulties. We summarize: In the old theories of electric fluids, in the corpuscular and wave theories of light, we witness the further attempts to apply the mechanical view. But in the realm of electric and optical phenomena we meet grave difficulties in this application. A moving charge acts upon a magnetic needle. But the force, instead of depending only upon distance, depends also upon the velocity of the charge. The force neither repels nor attracts but acts perpendicular to the line connecting the needle and the charge. In optics we have to decide in favor of the wave theory against the corpuscular theory of light. Waves spreading in a medium consisting of particles, with mechanical forces acting between them, are certainly a mechanical concept. But what is the medium through which light spreads and what are its mechanical properties? There is no hope of reducing the optical phenomena to the mechanical ones before this question is answered. But the difficulties in solving this problem are so great that we have to give it up and thus give up the mechanical view as well. The foregoing consists of Chapters I and II from Einstein and Infeld’s the evolution of physics .