continue..
along without a hat, with his large eyes on her, and his hair flung back. He could not take off what was not on his head, but put up his hand in a salute, and said: “Can you tell us if there’s a farm near here where we could stay the night? I’ve gone lame.” “There’s only our farm near, Sir.” She spoke without shyness, in a pretty, soft, crisp voice. “And where is that?” “Down here, Sir.” “Would you put us up?” “Oh! I think we would.” “Will you show us the way?” “Yes, Sir.” He limped on, silent, and Garton took up the catechism. “Are you a Devonshire girl?” “No, Sir.” “What then?” “From Wales.” “Ah! I thought you were a Celt; so it’s not your farm?” “My aunt’s, Sir.” “And your uncle’s?” “He is dead.” “Who farms it, then?” “My aunt, and my three cousins.” “But your uncle was a Devonshire man?” “Yes, Sir.” “Have you lived here long?” “Seven years.” “And how d’you like it after Wales?” “I don’t know, Sir.” “I suppose you don’t remember?” “Oh, yes! But it is different.” “I believe you!” Ashurst broke in suddenly: “How old are you?” “Seventeen, Sir.” “And what’s your name?” “Megan David.” “This is Robert Garton, and I am Frank Ashurst. We wanted to get on to Chagford.” “It is a pity your leg is hurting you.” Ashurst smiled, and when he smiled his face was rather beautiful. Descending past the narrow wood, they came on the farm suddenly—a long, low, stone-built dwelling with casement windows, in a farm-yard where pigs and fowls and an old mare were straying. A short steep-up grass hill behind was crowned with a few Scotch firs, and in front, an old orchard of apple-trees, just breaking into flower, stretched down to a stream and a long wild meadow. A little boy with oblique dark eyes was shepherding a pig, and by the house door stood a woman, who came towards them. The girl said: “It is Mrs. Narracombe, my aunt.” “Mrs. Narracombe, my aunt,” had a quick, dark eye like a mother wild duck’s, and something of the same snaky turn about her neck. “We met your niece on the road,” said Ashurst; “she thought you might perhaps put us up for the night.” Mrs. Narracombe, taking them in from head to heel, answered: “Well, I can, if you don’t mind one room. Megan, get the spare room ready, and a bowl of cream. You’ll be wanting tea, I suppose.” Passing through a sort of porch made by two yew-trees and some flowering-currant bushes, the girl disappeared into the house, her peacock Tam o’ Shanter bright athwart that rosy-pink and the dark green of the yews. “Will you come into the parlour and rest your leg? You’ll be from college, perhaps?” “We were, but we’ve gone down now.” Mrs. Narracombe nodded sagely. The parlour, brick-floored, with bare table and shiny chairs and sofa stuffed with horsehair, seemed never to have been used, it was so terribly clean. Ashurst sat down at once on the sofa, holding his lame knee between his hands, and Mrs. Narracombe gazed at him. He was the only son of a late professor of chemistry, but people found a certain lordliness in one who was often so sublimely unconscious of them. “Is there a stream where we could bathe?” “There’s the strame at the bottom of the orchard, but sittin’ down you’ll not be covered!” “How deep?” “Well, ’tis about a foot and a half, maybe.” “Oh! That’ll do fine. Which way?” “Down the lane, through the second gate on the right, an’ the pool’s by the big apple-tree that stands by itself. There’s trout there, if you can tickle them.” “They’re more likely to tickle us!” Mrs. Narracombe smiled. “There’ll be the tea ready when you come back.” The pool, formed by the damming of a rock, had a sandy bottom; and the big apple-tree, lowest in the orchard, grew so close that its boughs almost overhung the water; it was in leaf, and all but in flower—its crimson buds just bursting. There was not room for more than one at a time in that narrow bath, and Ashurst waited his turn, rubbing his knee and gazing at the wild meadow, all rocks and thorn-trees and field-flowers, with a grove of beeches beyond, raised up on a flat mound. Every bough was swinging in the wind, every spring bird calling, and a slanting sunlight dappled the grass. He thought of Theocritus, and the river Cherwell, of the moon, and the maiden with the dewy eyes; of so many things that he seemed to think of nothing; and he felt absurdly happy. During a late and sumptuous tea with eggs to it, cream and jam, and thin, fresh cakes touched with saffron, Garton descanted on the Celts. It was about the period of the Celtic awakening, and the discovery that there was Celtic blood about this family had excited one who believed that he was a Celt himself. Sprawling on a horsehair chair, with a handmade cigarette dribbling from the corner of his curly lips, he had been plunging his cold pin-points of eyes into Ashurst’s and praising the refinement of the Welsh. To come out of Wales into England was like the change from china to earthenware! Frank, as a d—d Englishman, had not of course perceived the exquisite refinement and emotional capacity of that Welsh girl! And, delicately stirring in the dark mat of his still wet hair, he explained how exactly she illustrated the writings of the Welsh bard Morgan-ap-Something in the twelfth century. Ashurst, full length on the horsehair sofa, and jutting far beyond its end, smoked a deeply coloured pipe, and did not listen, thinking of the girl’s face when she brought in a relay of cakes. It had been exactly like looking at a flower, or some other pretty sight in Nature—till, with a funny little shiver, she had lowered her glance and gone out, quiet as a mouse. “Let’s go to the kitchen,” said Garton, “and see some more of her.” The kitchen was a whitewashed room with rafters, to which were attached smoked hams; there were flower-pots on the window-sill, and guns hanging on nails, queer mugs, china and pewter, and portraits of Queen Victoria. A long, narrow table of plain wood was set with bowls and spoons, under a string of high-hung onions; two sheep-dogs and three cats lay here and there. On one side of the recessed fire-place sat two small boys, idle, and good as gold; on the other sat a stout, light-eyed, red-faced youth with hair and lashes the colour of the tow he was running through the barrel of a gun; between them Mrs. Narracombe dreamily stirred some savoury-scented stew in a large pot. Two other youths, oblique-eyed, dark-haired, rather sly-faced, like the two little boys, were talking together and lolling against the wall; and a short, elderly, cleanshaven man in corduroys, seated in the window, was conning a battered journal. The girl Megan seemed the only active creature—drawing cider and passing with the jugs from cask to table. Seeing them thus about to eat, Garton said: “Ah! If you’ll let us, we’ll come back when supper’s over,” and without waiting for an answer they withdrew again to the parlour. But the colour in the kitchen, the warmth, the scents, and all those faces heightened the bleakness of their shiny room, and they resumed their seats moodily. “Regular gypsy type, those boys. There was only one Saxon—the fellow cleaning the gun. That girl is a very subtle study psychologically.” Ashurst’s lips twitched. Garton seemed to him an ass just then. Subtle study! She was a wild flower. A creature it did you good to look at. Study! Garton went on: “Emotionally she would be wonderful. She wants awakening.” “Are you going to awaken her?” Garton looked at him and smiled. “How coarse and English you are!” that curly smile seemed saying. And Ashurst puffed his pipe. Awaken her! This fool had the best opinion of himself! He threw up the window and leaned out. Dusk had gathered thick. The farm buildings and the wheel-house were all dim and bluish, the apple-trees but a blurred wilderness; the air smelled of wood smoke from the kitchen fire. One bird going to bed later than the others was uttering a half-hearted twitter, as though surprised at the darkness. From the stable came the snuffle and stamp of a feeding horse. And away over there was the loom of the moor, and away and away the shy stars which had not as yet full light, pricking white through the deep blue heavens. A quavering owl hooted. Ashurst drew a deep breath. What a night to wander out in! A padding of unshod hoofs came up the lane, and three dim, dark shapes passed—ponies on an evening march. Their heads, black and fuzzy, showed above the gate. At the