continue..
have also another use, which is even more important. They permit calculation. This is an extremely important conception which deserves our close attention. Calculation is the process of combining two or more numerical laws in such a way as to produce a third numerical law. The simplest form of it may be illustrated by the following example. We know the following two laws which, in rather different forms, have been quoted before: (1) the weight of a given volume of any substance is proportional to its density; (2) the density of a gas is proportional to the pressure upon it. From these two laws we can deduce the third law: the weight of a given volume of any gas is proportional to the pressure upon it. That conclusion seems to follow directly without any need for further experiments. Accordingly we appear to have arrived at a fresh numerical law without adducing any fresh experimental evidence. But is that possible? All our previous inquiry leads us to believe that laws, whether numerical or other, can only be proved by experimental inquiry and that the proof of a new law without new experimental evidence is impossible. How are we to reconcile the two conclusions? When we have answered that question we shall understand what is the importance of calculation for science. Let us first note that it is possible, without violating the conclusions already reached, to deduce something from a numerical law by a process of mere thought without new experiment. For instance, from the law that the density of iron is 7, I can deduce that a portion of it which has a volume 1 will have a weight 7. But this deduction is merely stating in new terms what was asserted by the original law; when I said that the density of iron was 7, I meant (among other things) that a volume 1 had a weight 7; if I had not meant that I should never have asserted the law. The “deduction” is nothing but a translation of the law (or of part of it) into different language, and is of no greater scientific importance than a translation from (say) English into French. One kind of translation, like the other, may have useful results, but it is not the kind of useful result that is obtained from calculation. Pure deduction never achieves anything but this kind of translation; it never leads to anything new. But the calculation taken as an example does lead to something new. Neither when I asserted the first law, nor when I asserted the second did I mean what is asserted by the third; I might have asserted the first without knowing the second and the second without knowing the first (for I might have known what the density of a gas was under different conditions without knowing precisely how it is measured); and I might have asserted either of them, without knowing the third. The third law is not merely an expression in different words of something known before; it is a new addition to knowledge. But we have added to knowledge only because we have introduced an assertion which was not contained in the two original statements. The deduction depends on the fact that if one thing (A) is proportional to another thing (B) and if B is proportional to a third thing (C), then A is proportional to C. This proposition was not contained in the original statements. But, the reader may reply, it was so contained, because it is involved in the very meaning of “proportional”; when we say that A is proportional to B, we mean to imply the fact which has just been stated. Now that is perfectly true if we are thinking of the mathematical meaning of “proportional,” but it is not true if we are thinking of the physical meaning. The proposition which we have really used in making our deduction is this: If weight is proportional (in the mathematical sense) to density, when weight is varied by taking different substances, then it is also proportional to density when weight is varied by compressing more of the same substance into the same volume. That is a statement which experiment alone can prove, and it is because we have in fact assumed that experimental statement that we have been able to “deduce” a new piece of experimental knowledge. It is involved in the original statements only if, when it is said that density is proportional to pressure, it is implied that it has been ascertained by experiment that the law of density is true, and that there is a constant density of a gas, however compressed, given by dividing the weight by the volume. The conclusion I want to draw is this. When we appear to arrive at new scientific knowledge by mere deduction from previous knowledge, we are always assuming some experimental fact which is not clearly involved in the original statements. What we usually assume is that some law is true in circumstances rather more general than those we have considered hitherto. Of course the assumption may be quite legitimate, for the great value of laws is that they are applicable to circumstances more general than those of the experiments on which they are based; but we can never be perfectly sure that it is legitimate until we try. Calculation, then, when it appears to add anything to our knowledge, is always slightly precarious; like theory, it suggests strongly that some law may be true, rather than proves definitely that some law must be true. So far we have spoken of calculation as if it were merely deduction; we have not referred to the fact that calculation always involves a special type of deduction, namely mathematical deduction. For there are, of course, forms of deduction which are not mathematical. All argument is based, or should be based, upon the logical processes which are called deduction; and most of us are prepared to argue, however slight our mathematical attainments. I do not propose to discuss here generally what are the distinctive characteristics of mathematical argument; for an exposition of that matter the reader should turn to works in which mathematicians expound their own study. I want only to consider why it is that this kind of deduction has such a special significance for science. And, stated briefly, the reason is this. The assumption, mentioned in the last paragraph, which is introduced in the process of deduction, is usually suggested by the form of the deduction and by the ideas naturally associated with it. (Thus, in the example we took, the assumption is suggested by the proposition quoted about proportionality which is the idea especially associated by the form of the deduction). The assumptions thus suggested by mathematical deduction are almost invariably found to be actually true. It is this fact which gives to mathematical deduction its special significance for science. The Newtonian Assumption. Again an example is necessary and we will take one which brings us close to the actual use of mathematics in science. Let us return to Table II which gives the relation between the time for which a body has fallen and the distance through which it has fallen. The falling body, like all moving bodies, has a “velocity.” By the velocity of a body we mean the distance that it moves in a given time, and we measure the velocity by dividing that distance by that time (as we measure density by dividing the weight by the volume). But this way of measuring velocity gives a definite result only when the velocity is constant, that is to say, when the distance travelled is proportional to the time and the distance travelled in any given time is always the same (compare what was said about density on pp. 217–218). This condition is not fulfilled in our example; the distance fallen in the first second is 1, in the next 3, in the third 5, in the next 7—and so on. We usually express that fact by saying that the velocity increases as the body falls; but we ought really to ask ourselves whether there is such a thing as velocity in this case and whether, therefore, the statement can mean anything. For what is the velocity of the body at the end of the 3rd second—i.e. at the time called 3. We might say that it is to be found by taking the distance travelled in the second before 3, which is 5, or in the second after 3, which is 7, or in the second of which the instant “3” is the middle (from 2 1/2 to 3 1/2), which turns out to be 6. Or again we might say it is to be found by taking half the distance travelled in the two seconds of which “3” is the middle (from 2 to 4) which is again 6. We get different values for the velocity according to which of these alternatives we