Work: “Arguments for and Against Galileo” fromThe Defense of Galileo Field: arguments for and against galileo Author: Tommaso Campanella Title: THE ARGUMENTS BROUGHT AGAINST GALILEO 1. He has completely overturned theological dogmas, and attempts to introduce new theories opposed to the science and metaphysics of Aristotle upon which St. Thomas and all scholastics have based theological doctrine. 2. He promulgates opinions which contradict those of all the Fathers and scholastics. Indeed, he teaches that the sun and sphere of the stars remain fixed, that the earth moves, and is placed beyond the center of the world. The Fathers, the scholastics, and our senses inform us differently. 3. Galileo openly contradicts Sacred Scripture. It is said in Psalm 92, “For he hath established the world which shall not be moved,” and in Psalm 103, “Who hast founded the earth upon its own bases; it shall not be moved for ever and ever.” And Solomon states in Ecclesiastes 1, “But the earth standeth for ever.” 4. Scripture clearly describes the motion of the sun, and says in Ecclesiastes 1, “The earth standeth for ever; the sun riseth and goeth down, and returneth to his place, and there rising again, maketh his round by the south, and turneth again to the north; the spirit goeth forward surveying all places round about, and returneth to his circuits.” 5. It is called in Joshua 10 a great miracle that Joshua restrained the motion of the sun by his command, “Move not, O sun, toward Gabaon, nor thou, O moon, toward the valley of Ajalon…. So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down for the space of one day.” This miracle again is described in Ecclesiasticus 46. 6. In Isaiah 38, God gave Hezekiah a portent in the sundial of Ahaz, as a sign that he would recover his health, “And the sun returned ten lines by the degrees by which it had gone down.” As we know from 2 Paralipomenon 32 [2 Chronicles], the King of the Chaldeans questioned Hezekiah regarding this portent, and believing that it resulted from natural causes, denied that the sun had moved backward. If God did not stop the motion of the sun [it is declared], there was no miracle. Therefore Galileo shows that Scripture is false, for Scripture describes as true miracles the standing and the returning of the sun. 7. The moving stars of heaven are praised in Holy Scripture. Deborah sings in her song, Judges 5, “The stars remaining in their order and courses fought against Sisra.” Therefore the stars move, and necessarily the heaven, for they are believed placed within it as knots within a board. Moreover, the Apostle Judas speaks of “wandering stars,” [13] and 3 Esdras 4, “Great is the earth, high is the heaven, swift is the sun in his course, for he compasseth the heavens round about, and returneth again to his own place in one day.” Since Galileo makes the starry heaven immobile, he openly contradicts the Scripture of God. 8. Galileo also says that water exists on the moon and the planets, which cannot be. These bodies are incorruptible, for do not all scholastics contend with Aristotle that they endure without change throughout all time? He describes lands and mountains in the moon and other celestial globes, and not only vilifies immeasurably the homes of the angels, but lessens our hope regarding heaven. 9. If the four elements which form our world exist in the stars, it follows from the doctrine of Galileo that, as Mohammed declared, there are many worlds with lands and seas, and with human inhabitants. However, Scripture speaks of only one world and of one created man, so that this belief is opposed to Scripture. I pass without comment the opinion that Galileo has revived the heresy that Christ must make atonement for the men who inhabit the stars, and die there again; just as formerly it was said that Christ must be crucified a second time in the antipodes, if the men living there were to be saved as we have been saved. The heretic Paracelsus, whom the Jesuit Martin Delrio attacked in his Dis course on Magic, placed men, who rightly should participate in heavenly bliss, under the earth, in the air, and within the water, and questioned their redemption. 10. It is believed that nothing except the derogatory and the scandalous can be contributed by Galileo. Our schools now have and teach a theory of heaven and earth which supports scholastic theology. Whatever conflicting theory others present is therefore believed to degrade this theology and to prepare the way for its destruction. 11. Holy Scripture counsels us to “seek nothing higher, nor attempt to know more than it is necessary to know”; that we “leap not over the bounds which the Fathers set”; and that “the diligent searcher of majesty is overcome by vainglory.” Galileo disregards this counsel, subjects the heavens to his invention, and constructs the whole fabric of the world according to his pleasure. Cato rightly taught us to “leave secret things to God, and to permit heaven to inquire concerning them; for he who is mortal should concern himself with mortal things.”