continue..
would we live on if I married you?’ “We discussed it for a long time, in the end, I lost all control over myself and declared that I could no longer live with my grandmother, that I’d run away, that I’d had enough of being fastened to her with a safety pin, and that, whatever he might say, I was going to Moscow with him because I couldn’t live without him. Shame, love, pride—everything—was seething within me at the same time, and fearing that he might refuse me, I collapsed on the bed almost in convulsions. “He sat in complete silence for a few moments, then he got up and took my hand. “‘Listen, my nice little Nastenka,’ he said, and I saw that there were tears in his eyes, too. ‘I swear to you that I’m certain I’d be happy with you if I were ever in a position to marry you. Listen: I have to go to Moscow, and I’ll be staying there for exactly a year. I must go there to take care of my business. When I come back, if you still love me, I swear we’ll be happy. But now I have no right to promise you anything. I’ll say too, however, that if I can’t make it in one year, I’ll still come and find you later—that is, if you don’t prefer someone else by then, because I cannot, I have no right to bind you to me by promises.’ “The next day he was gone. We’d agreed not to say a word to Grandma. He’d insisted upon that. Well, that’s about all there is to my story. The year has gone by, and he’s come back. Indeed, he’s been here for three days already, and—and—” “And what?” I cried, unable to stand it any longer. “He hasn’t come to see me,” Nastenka said, and I felt that she was making a great effort, “he hasn’t given a sign of life—” She cut herself short, remained silent for a few seconds, then covering her face with her hands, burst into sobs that tore at my heart. I hadn’t expected such an ending. “Nastenka,” I ventured imploringly, “please, please don’t cry. Maybe he simply hasn’t come yet….” “No, no, he’s here, he’s here!” Nastenka cried. “I know it! We agreed that evening before he left…. After we’d said all the things I’ve already told you, we came out to take a walk on this embankment. It was ten o’clock. We sat down on the bench; I’d stopped crying. I loved the things he was saying to me…. He told me that as soon as he was back in town, if I still wanted him, we’d tell everything to Grandma. And now he’s back in town—I know it for sure—but he still hasn’t come to see me….” And she burst into tears again. “But, my God, is there really nothing I can do for you?” I leaped up from the bench in complete despair. “Tell me, Nastenka, couldn’t I go and see him or something?” “Do you think that’s possible?” she said, suddenly raising her head. “No, of course not,” I said, coming back to my senses. “You know what you should do? Write him a letter.” “No, I can’t; that’s impossible too,” she said firmly, but this time she lowered her eyes. “Why is it impossible? Why?” I insisted. “Do you know what letter you ought to write, Nastenka? There are letters and letters, you know. So please trust my judgment; I won’t give you bad advice. Everything will turn out fine, I’m sure. You took the initiative in the first place, so why not now?” “Impossible, impossible, it would look as if I were throwing myself at him—” “But no, you’re wrong, dear little Nastenka!” I interrupted her without trying to hide my smile. “You have the right to demand. He promised, after all, didn’t he? And, from what I understand, he’s an honest, considerate man, and I’m sure there’s nothing dishonorable in his behavior.” I continued, admiring the logic of my own reasoning and arguments more and more: “What did he do? He tied himself down by a promise. He declared that if he married anyone it would be you, while leaving you completely free to refuse him if your feelings changed. So it is quite natural that you make the first move. It’s your right, your advantage over him, and you should do it even if, for instance, you decide to release him from his word.” “Tell me, how would you write to him?” “What?” “The letter, of course.” “Well, I’d start like this: ‘Dear Sir—’” “Must I really address him ‘dear sir’?” “Yes, it’s indispensable. But after all, I think—” “Well, go on!” “I’d write like this: “‘Dear Sir, Forgive me—’ No, no apologies are necessary. The letter justifies itself. Write simply: “‘I thought I would write to you first. Please forgive my impatience, but for a whole year I have lived on hope. Am I to blame, then, if I cannot stand even one day of doubt? Now that you are back in town, and may have had a change of heart, let me assure you by this letter that I have nothing to reproach you for, for I cannot command your love. So I will consider it simply as my fate. “‘You are a decent and honorable man, and I am sure you will not laugh or be angry reading these impatient lines. You will keep in mind that they are written by a poor, lonely girl who has no one to advise her and who never could control her own heart. But forgive me for entertaining even a fleeting suspicion that you could hurt, even in thought, the girl who has loved you so much and who still loves you.’” “Yes, yes, that’s exactly what I had in mind!” Nastenka was very enthusiastic and her eyes sparkled with joy. “Ah, you have resolved my doubts! I think God Himself sent you to me! Thank you, thank you, thank you!” “Thank me for what? For being sent by God?” It was a delight to look at her pretty face, so happy now. “Yes, thank you for being sent to me to begin with.” “Ah, Nastenka, since we feel grateful sometimes to people just for living with us, let me thank you for having met you, for making it possible for me to remember you as long as I live.” “Well, that will do for now. Listen, we agreed that when he came back, he’d let me know by leaving a letter for me with some friends of mine, nice, simple people who know nothing about this. Or, if he couldn’t leave the letter, he’d come here to this bench, at ten in the evening, on the very day he returned to Petersburg. Now I know he’s in town, but he hasn’t kept our date or written the letter. I cannot possibly leave my grandmother in the morning, so couldn’t you, please, take my letter to those friends I mentioned? They’ll see that he gets it. And if there’s an answer, bring it to me here tomorrow evening at ten.” “But what about the letter? You have to write it first; at best, you might get a reply the day after tomorrow.” “The letter…” Nastenka said, somewhat at a loss, “the letter…but…” She didn’t finish. She suddenly turned her face away from me, growing red as a red rose, and I felt her slipping a letter into my hand that, it turned out, had already been written and sealed. Something light, graceful, and familiar flashed through my mind. “R-r-o-si-i-na…” I intoned. “Rosina!” we sang together, and I was so moved and delighted that I felt terribly like putting my arms around her. She was blushing deeply and laughing, and tiny glistening tears hung on her black eyelashes. “Enough, enough. Good-by now, good night!” she rattled. “You have the letter and the address. Good night, see you tomorrow!” She pressed both my hands hard, nodded, and darted off. I remained standing there for a long time, following her with my eyes. “See you tomorrow…tomorrow…” flashed in my head as she disappeared around a corner.