continue..
take into account whether the route begins in A or not. For example, if there are two bridges that lead to A and the route starts from A, then the letter A will occur twice, once to indicate the departure from A by one of the bridges and a second time to indicate the return to A by the other bridge. However, if the traveller starts his journey in another region, the letter A will occur only once, since by my method of description the single occurrence of A indicates an entrance into as well as a departure from A. 12. Suppose, as in our case, there are four bridges leading into the region A, and the route is to begin at A. The letter A will then occur three times in the expression for the whole route, while if the journey had started in another region, A would occur only twice. With six bridges leading to A the letter A will occur four times if A is the starting point, otherwise only three times. In general, if the number of bridges is even, the number of occurrences of the letter A, when the starting region is not A, will be half the number of the bridges; one more than half, when the route starts from A. 13. Every route must, of course, start in some one region, thus from the number of bridges that lead to each region I determine the number of times that the corresponding letter will occur in the expression for the entire route as follows: When the number of the bridges is odd I increase it by one and divide by two; when the number is even I simply divide it by two. Then if the sum of the resulting numbers is equal to the actual number of bridges plus one, the journey can be accomplished, though it must start in a region approached by an odd number of bridges. But if the sum is one less than the number of bridges plus one, the journey is feasible if its starting point is a region approached by an even number of bridges, for in that case the sum is again increased by one. 14. My procedure for determining whether in any given system of rivers and bridges it is possible to cross each bridge exactly once is as follows: 1. First I designate the individual regions separated from one another by the water as A, B, C, etc. 2. I take the total number of bridges, increase it by one, and write the resulting number uppermost. 3. Under this number I write the letters A, B, C, etc., and opposite each of these I note the number of bridges that lead to that particular region. 4. I place an asterisk next the letters that have even numbers opposite them. 5. Opposite each even number I write the half of that number and opposite each odd number I write half of the sum formed by that number plus one. 6. I add up the last column of numbers. If the sum is one less than, or equal to, the number written at the top, I conclude that the required journey can be made. But it must be noted that when the sum is one less than the number at the top, the route must start from a region marked with an asterisk. And in the other case, when these two numbers are equal, it must start from a region that does not have an asterisk. For the Königsberg problem I would set up the tabulation as follows: Number of bridges 7, giving 8 (=7+1) bridges A, 5 3 B, 3 2 C, 3 2 D, 3 2 A,|5|3 B,|3|2 C,|3|2 D,|3|2 A, 5 3 B, 3 2 C, 3 2 D, 3 2 The last column now adds up to more than 8, and hence the required journey cannot be made. 15. Let us take an example of two islands, with four rivers forming the surrounding water, as shown in Fig. 3. Fifteen bridges, marked a, b, c, d, etc., cross the water around the islands and the adjoining rivers; the question is whether a journey can be arranged that will pass over all the bridges, but not over any of them more than once. 1. I begin by marking all the regions that are separated from one another by the water with the letters A, B, C, D, E, F—there are six of them. 2. I take the number of bridges—15—add one and write this number—16—uppermost. 3. I write the letters A, B, C, etc., in a column and opposite each letter I write the number of bridges connecting with that region, e.g., 8 bridges for A, 4 for B, etc. 4. The letters that have even numbers opposite them I mark with an asterisk. 5. In a third column I write the half of each corresponding even number, or, if the number is odd, I add one to it, and put down half the sum. 6. Finally I add the numbers in the third column and get 16 as the sum. This is the same as the number 16 that 16 A*,|8|4 B*,|4|2 C*,|4|2 D,|3|2 E,|5|3 F*,|6|3 16 appears above, and hence it follows that the journey can be effected if it begins in regions D or E, whose symbols have no asterisk. The following expression represents such a route: Title: EaFbBcFdAeFfCgAhCiDkAmEnApBoElD. Here I have also indicated, by small letters between the capitals, which bridges are crossed. 16. By this method we can easily determine, even in cases of considerable complexity, whether a single crossing of each of the bridges in sequence is actually possible. But I should now like to give another and much simpler method, which follows quite easily from the preceding, after a few preliminary remarks. In the first place, I note that the sum of all the numbers of bridges to each region, that are written down in the second column opposite the letters A, B, C, etc., is necessarily double the actual number of bridges. The reason is that in the tabulation of the bridges leading to the various regions each bridge is counted twice, once for each of the two regions that it connects. 17. From this observation it follows that the sum of the numbers in the second column must be an even number, since half of it represents the actual number of bridges. Hence it is impossible for exactly one of these numbers (indicating how many bridges connect with each region) to be odd, or, for that matter, three or five, etc. In other words, if any of the numbers opposite the letters A, B, C, etc., are odd, an even number of them must be odd. In the Königsberg problem, for instance, all four of the numbers opposite the letters A, B, C, D were odd, as explained in section 14, while in the example just given (section 15) only two of the numbers were odd, namely those opposite D and E. 18. Since the sum of the numbers opposite A, B, C, etc., is double the number of bridges, it is clear that if this sum is increased by two and then divided by 2 the result will be the number written at the top. When all the numbers in the second column are even, and the half of each is written down in the third column, the total of this column will be one less than the number at the top. In that case it will always be possible to cross all the bridges. For in whatever region the journey begins, there will be an even number of bridges leading to it, which is the requirement. In the Königsberg problem we could, for instance, arrange matters so that each bridge is crossed twice, which is equivalent to dividing each bridge into two, whence the number of bridges leading to each region would be even. 19. Further, when only two of the numbers opposite the letters are odd, and the others even, the required route is possible provided it begins in a region approached by an odd number of bridges. We take half of each even number, and likewise half of each odd number after adding one, as our procedure requires; the sum of these halves will then be one greater than the number of bridges, and hence equal to the number written at the top. Similarly, where four, six, or eight, etc., of the numbers in the second column are odd it is evident that the sum of the numbers in the third column will be one, two, three, etc., greater than the top number, as the case may be, and hence the desired journey is impossible. 20. Thus for any configuration that may arise the easiest way of determining whether a single crossing of all the bridges is possible is to apply the following rules: If there are more than two regions