continue..
adopt. There are doubtless good reasons in this example for choosing the alternative 6, for two ways (and really many more than two ways, all of them plausible) lead to the same result. But if we took a more complicated relation between time and distance than that of Table II, we should find that these two ways gave different results, and that neither of them were obviously more plausible than any alternative. Do then we mean anything by velocity in such cases and, if so, what do we mean? It is here that mathematics can help us. By simply thinking about the matter Newton, the greatest of mathematicians, devised a rule by which he suggested that velocity might be measured in all such cases. It is a rule applicable to every kind of relation between time and distance that actually occurs; and it gives the “plausible” result whenever that relation is so simple that one rule is more plausible than another. Moreover it is a very pretty and ingenious rule; it is based on ideas which are themselves attractive and in every way it appeals to the aesthetic sense of the mathematician. It enables us, when we know the relation between time and distance, to measure uniquely and certainly the velocity at every instant, in however complicated a way the velocity may be changing. It is therefore strongly suggested that we take as the velocity the value obtained according to this rule. But can there be any question whether we are right or wrong to take that value; can experiment show that we ought to take one value rather than another? Yes, it can; and in this way. When the velocity is constant and we can measure it without ambiguity, then we can establish laws between that velocity and certain properties of the moving body. Thus, if we allow a moving steel ball to impinge on a lead block, it will make a dent in it determined by its velocity; and when we have established by observations of this kind a relation between the velocity and the size of the dent, we can obviously use the size of the dent to measure the velocity. Suppose now our falling body is a steel ball, and we allow it to impinge on a lead block after falling through different distances; we shall find that its velocity, estimated by the size of the dent, agrees exactly with the velocity estimated by Newton’s rule, and not with that estimated by any other rule (so long, of course, as the other rule does not give the same result as Newton’s). That, I hope the reader will agree, is a very definite proof that Newton’s rule is right. On this account only Newton’s rule would be very important, but it has a wider and much more important application. So far we have expressed the rule as giving the velocity at any instant when the relation between time and distance is known; but the problem might be reversed. We might know the velocity at any instant and want to find out how far the body has moved in any given time. If the velocity were the same at all instants, the problem would be easy; the distance would be the velocity multiplied by the time. But if it is not the same, the right answer is by no means easy to obtain; in fact the only way of obtaining it is by the use of Newton’s rule. The form of that rule makes it easy to reverse it and, instead of obtaining the velocity from the distance, to obtain the distance from the velocity; but until that rule was given, the problem could not have been solved; it would have baffled the wisest philosophers of Greece. Now this particular problem is not of any very great importance, for it would be easier to measure by experiment the distance moved than to measure the velocity and calculate the distance. But there are closely analogous cases—one of which we shall notice immediately—in which the position will be reversed. Let us therefore ask what is the assumption which, in accordance with the conclusion reached on p. 230, must be introduced, if the solution of the problem is to give new experimental knowledge. We have seen that the problem could be solved easily if the velocity were constant; what we are asking, is how it is to be solved if the velocity does not remain constant. If we examined the rule by which the solution is obtained, we should find that it involves the assumption that the effect upon the distance travelled of a certain velocity at a given instant of time is the same as it would be if the body had at that instant the same constant velocity. We know how far the body would travel at that instant if the velocity were constant, and the assumption tells us that it will travel at that instant the same distance although the velocity is not constant. To obtain the whole distance travelled in any given time, we have to add up the distances travelled at the instants of which that time is made up; the reversed Newtonian rule gives a simple and direct method for adding up these distances, and thus solves the problem. It should be noted that the assumption is one that cannot possibly be proved by experiment; we are assuming that something would happen if things were not what they actually are; and experiment can only tell us about things as they are. Accordingly calculation of this kind must, in all strictness, always be confirmed by experiment before it is certain. But as a matter of fact, the assumption is one of which we are almost more certain than we are of any experiment. It is characteristic, not only of the particular example that we have been considering, but of the whole structure of modern mathematical physics which has arisen out of the work of Newton. We should never think it really necessary to-day to confirm by experiment the results of calculation based on that assumption; indeed if experiment and calculation did not agree, we should always maintain that the former and not the latter was wrong. But the assumption is there, and it is primarily suggested by the aesthetic sense of the mathematician, not dictated by the facts of the external world. Its certainty is yet one more striking instance of the conformity of the external world with our desires. And now let us glance at an example in which such calculation becomes of real importance. Let us take a pendulum, consisting of a heavy bob at the end of a pivoted rod, draw it aside and then let it swing. We ask how it will swing, what positions the bob will occupy at various times after it is started. Our calculation proceeds from two known laws. (1) We know how the force on the pendulum varies with its position. That we can find out by actual experiments. We hang a weight by a string over a pulley, attach the other end of the string to the bob, and notice how far the bob is pulled aside by various weights hanging at the end of the string. We thus get a numerical law between the force and the angle which the rod of the pendulum makes with the vertical. (2) We know how a body will move under a constant force. It will move in accordance with Table II, the distance travelled being proportional to the “square” of the time during which the force acts. Now we introduce the Newtonian assumption. We know the force in each position; we know how it would move in that position if the force on it were constant; actually it is not constant, but we assume that the motion will be the same as it would be if, in that position, the force were constant. With that assumption, the general Newtonian rule (of which the application to velocity is only a special instance) enables us to sum up the effects of the motions in the different positions, and thus to arrive at the desired relation between the time and the positions successively occupied by the pendulum. The whole of the calculation which plays so large a part in modern science is nothing but an elaboration of that simple example.