continue..
the next drawing indicates the guessed direction of the uniform motion if all external forces were to vanish. It is the direction of the so-called tangent. Looking at a moving particle through a microscope one sees a very small part of the curve, which appears as a small segment. The tangent is its prolongation. Thus the vector drawn represents the velocity at a given instant. The velocity vector lies on the tangent. Its length represents the magnitude of the velocity, or the speed as indicated, for instance, by the speedometer of a car. Our idealized experiment about destroying the motion in order to find the velocity vector must not be taken too seriously. It only helps us to understand what we should call the velocity vector and enables us to determine it for a given instant at a given point. In the next drawing, the velocity vectors for three different positions of a particle moving along a curve are shown. In this case not only the direction but the magnitude of the velocity, as indicated by the length of the vector, varies during the motion. Does this new concept of velocity satisfy the requirement formulated for all generalizations? That is: does it reduce to the familiar concept if the curve becomes a straight line? Obviously it does. The tangent to a straight line is the line itself. The velocity vector lies in the line of the motion, just as in the case of the moving cart or the rolling spheres. The next step is the introduction of the change in velocity of a particle moving along a curve. This also may be done in various ways, from which we choose the simplest and most convenient. The last drawing showed several velocity vectors representing the motion at various points along the path. The first two of these may be drawn again so that they have a common starting point, as we have seen is possible with vectors. The dotted vector, we call the change in velocity. Its starting point is the end of the first vector and its end point the end of the second vector. This definition of the change in velocity may, at first sight, seem artificial and meaningless. It becomes much clearer in the special case in which vectors (1) and (2) have the same direction. This, of course, means going over to the case of straight-line motion. If both vectors have the same initial point the dotted vector again connects their end points. The drawing is now identical with that on page 499, and the previous concept is regained as a special case of the new one. We may remark that we had to separate the two lines in our drawing since otherwise they would coincide and be indistinguishable. We now have to take the last step in our process of generalization. It is the most important of all the guesses we have had to make so far. The connection between force and change in velocity has to be established so that we can formulate the clue which will enable us to understand the general problem of motion. The clue to an explanation of motion along a straight line was simple: external force is responsible for change in velocity; the force vector has the same direction as the change. And now what is to be regarded as the clue to curvilinear motion? Exactly the same! The only difference is that change of velocity has now a broader meaning than before. A glance at the dotted vectors of the last two drawings shows this point clearly. If the velocity is known for all points along the curve, the direction of the force at any point can be deduced at once. One must draw the velocity vectors for two instants separated by a very short time-interval and therefore corresponding to positions very near each other. The vector from the end point of the first to that of the second indicates the direction of the acting force. But it is essential that the two velocity vectors should be separated only by a “very short” time-interval. The rigorous analysis of such words as “very near,” “very short” is far from simple. Indeed it was this analysis which led Newton and Leibnitz to the discovery of differential calculus. It is a tedious and elaborate path which leads to the generalization of Galileo’s clue. We cannot show here how abundant and fruitful the consequences of this generalization have proved. Its application leads to simple and convincing explanations of many facts previously incoherent and misunderstood. From the extremely rich variety of motions we shall take only the simplest and apply to their explanation the law just formulated. A bullet shot from a gun, a stone thrown at an angle, a stream of water emerging from a hose, all describe familiar paths of the same type, the parabola. Imagine a speedometer attached to a stone, for example, so that its velocity vector may be drawn for any instant. The result may well be that represented in the last drawing. The direction of the force acting on the stone is just that of the change in velocity, and we have seen how it may be determined. The result, shown in the next drawing, indicates that the force is vertical, and directed down- ward. It is exactly the same as when a stone is allowed to fall from the top of a tower. The paths are quite different, as also are the velocities, but the change in velocity has the same direction, that is, toward the center of the earth. A stone attached to the end of a string and swung around in a horizontal plane moves in a circular path. All the vectors in the diagram representing this motion have the same length if the speed is uniform. Nevertheless, the velocity is not uniform, for the path is not a straight line. Only in uniform, rectilinear motion are there no forces involved. Here, however, there are, and the velocity changes not in magnitude but in direction. According to the law of motion there must be some force responsible for this change, a force in this case between the stone and the hand holding the string. A further question arises immediately: in what direction does the force act? Again a vector diagram shows the an swer. The velocity vectors for two very near points are drawn, and the change of velocity found. This last vector is seen to be directed along the string toward the center of the circle, and is always perpendicular to the velocity vector, or tangent. In other words the hand exerts a force on the stone by means of the string. Very similar is the more important example of the revolution of the moon around the earth. This may be represented approximately as uniform circular motion. The force is directed toward the earth for the same reason that it was directed toward the hand in our former example. There is no string connecting the earth and the moon, but we can imagine a line between the centers of the two bodies; the force lies along this line and is directed toward the center of the earth, just as the force on a stone thrown in the air or dropped from a tower. All that we have said concerning motion can be summed up in a single sentence. Force and change of velocity are vectors having the same direction. This is the initial clue to the problem of motion, but it certainly does not suffice for a thorough explanation of all motions observed. The transition from Aristotle’s line of thought to that of Galileo formed a most important cornerstone in the foundation of science. Once this break was made, the line of further development was clear. Our interest here lies in the first stages of development, in following initial clues, in showing how new physical concepts are born in the painful struggle with old ideas. We are concerned only with pioneer work in science, which consists of finding new and unexpected paths of development; with the adventures in scientific thought which create an ever-changing picture of the universe. The initial and fundamental steps are always of a revolutionary character. Scientific imagination finds old concepts too confining, and replaces them by new ones. The continued development along any line already initiated is more in the nature of evolution, until the next turning point is reached when a still newer field must be conquered. In order to understand, however, what reasons and what difficulties force a change in important concepts, we must know not only the initial clues, but also the conclusions which can be drawn. One of the most important characteristics of modern physics is that the conclusions drawn from initial clues are not only qualitative but also quantitative. Let us again consider a stone dropped from a tower. We have seen that its velocity increases as it falls, but we should like to know