continue..
has fallen during that time, we should get in our notebook parallel columns like this: Time|Distance|Time|Distance ---|---|---|--- 1|1|4|16 2|4|5|25 3|9|6|36 The numerals in the second column are arrived at by multiplying those in the first by themselves; in technical language, the second column is the “square” of the first. Another example. In place of dividing one column by some fixed number in order to get the other, we may use the multiplication table to divide some fixed number (e.g., 1) by that column. Then we should get the table 1|1.00|3|0.33 2|0.50|4|0.25 5|0.20 and so on. Here, again, is a pure numerical operation which does not correspond to any simple physical relation upon numbers; there is no collection simply related to another collection in such a way that the number of the first is equal to that obtained by dividing 1 by the number of the second. (Indeed, as we have seen that fractions have no application to number, and since this rule must lead to fractions, there cannot be such a relation.) And yet once more we find that this numerical relation does occur in a numerical law. If the first column represented the pressure on a given amount of gas, the second would represent the volume of that gas. So far, all the relations we have considered were derived directly from the multiplication table. But an extension of the process that we are tracing leads to relations which cannot be derived directly and thus carries us further from the original suggestions indicated by mere counting. Let us return to Table II, and consider what would happen if we found for the numerals in the second column values intermediate between those given. Suppose we measured the distance first and found 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15…; what does the rule lead us to expect for the corresponding entries in the first column, the values of the time. The answer will be given if in the multiplication table we can find numerals which, when multiplied by themselves, give 2, 3, 5… But a search will reveal that there are no such numerals. We can find numerals which, when multiplied by themselves give very nearly 2, 3, 5…; for instance, 1.41, 1.73, 2.24 give 1.9881, 2.9929, 5.0166, and we could find numerals which would come even closer to those desired. And that is really all we want, for our measurements are never perfectly accurate, and if we can get numerals which agree very nearly with our rule, that is all that we can expect. But the search for such numerals would be a very long and tedious business; it would involve our drawing up an enormously complicated multiplication table, including not only whole numbers but also fractions with many decimal places. And so the question arises if we cannot find some simpler rule for obtaining quickly the number which multiplied by itself will come as close as we please to 2, 3, 4… Well, we can; the rule is given in every textbook of arithmetic; it need not be given here. The point which interests us is that, just as the simple multiplication of two numerals suggested a new process, namely the multiplication of a numeral by itself, so this new process suggests in its turn many other and more complicated processes. To each of these new processes corresponds a new rule for relating numerals and for arriving at one starting from another; and to each new rule may correspond a numerical law. We thus get many fresh forms of numerical law suggested, and some of them will be found to represent actual experiments. This process for extending arithmetical operations beyond the simple division and multiplication from which we start; the consequent invention of new rules for relating numerals and deriving one from another; and the study of the rules, when they are invented—all this is a purely intellectual process. It does not depend on experiment at all; experiment enters only when we inquire whether there is an actual experimental law stating one of the invented numerical relations between measured properties. The process is, in fact, part of mathematics, not of experimental science; and one of the reasons why mathematics is useful to science is that it suggests possible new forms for numerical laws. Of course the examples that have been given are extremely elementary, and the actual mathematics of to-day has diverged very widely from such simple considerations; but the invention of such rules leads, logically if not historically, to one of the great branches of modern mathematics, the theory of functions. (When two numbers are related as in our tables, they are technically said to be “functions” of each other.) It has been developed by mathematicians to satisfy their own intellectual needs, their sense of logical neatness and of form; but though great tracts of it have no bearing whatever upon experimental science, it still remains remarkable how often relations developed by the mathematician for his own purposes prove in the end to have direct and immediate application to the experimental facts of science. Numerical Laws and Derived Measurement. In this discussion there has been overlooked temporarily the feature of numerical laws which, in the previous chapter, we decided gave rise to their importance, namely, that they made possible systems of derived measurement. In the first law, taken as an example (Table I), the rule by which the numerals in the second column were derived from those in the first involved a numeral 7, which was not a member of those columns, but an additional number applicable equally to all members of the columns. This constant numeral, characteristic of the rule asserted by the numerical law, represented a property of the system investigated and permitted a derived measurement of that system. But in Table II, there is no such constant numeral; the rule for obtaining the second from the first column is simply that the numerals in the first column are to be multiplied by themselves; no other numeral is involved. But this simplicity is really misleading; we should not, except by a mere “fluke,” ever get such a table as Table II as a result of our measurements. The reason is this. Suppose that, in obtaining Table II, we have measured the time in seconds and the distance fallen in feet; and that we now propose to write down the result of exactly the same measurements, measuring the time in minutes and the distances in yards. Then the numerals in the first column, representing exactly the same observations, would all be divided by 60 and those in the second would all be divided by 3; the observation which was represented before by 60 in the first column would now be represented by 1; and the number in the second column represented before by 3 would now be represented by 1. If I now apply the rule to the two columns I shall find it will not work; the second is not the first multiplied by itself. But there will be a new rule, as the reader may see for himself; it will be that the second column is the same as the first, when the first is (1) multiplied by itself, and (2) the result multiplied by 1,200. And if we measured the time and the distance in some other units (say hours and miles), we should again have to amend our rule, but it would only differ from the former rule in the substitution for 1,200 of some other numeral. If we choose our units in yet a third way, we should get a third rule, and this time the constant numeral might be 1. We should have exactly Table II; but we should get that table exactly only because we had chosen our units of time and distance in a particular way. These considerations are quite general. Whatever the numerical law, the rule involved in it will be changed by changing the unit in which we measure the properties represented by the two columns; but the change will only consist in the substitution of one constant numeral for another. If we chance to choose the units in some particular way, that constant numeral may turn out to be 1 and so will disappear from sight. But it will always be there. There must be associated with every numerical law, involving a rule for arriving at the numerals in one column from those in the other, some constant numeral which is applicable to all members of the column alike. And this constant may always, as in the case of density, be the measure of some property to which derived measurement is applicable. Every numerical law therefore—this is the conclusion to be enforced—may give rise to a system of derived measurement; and as a matter of fact all important numerical laws do actually so give rise. Calculation. But though the establishment of system of derived measurement is one use of numerical laws, they