continue..
that she shouldn’t just turn her back on me, but should believe what I told her—then she might laugh at me if she wished, so long as she said one or two words of hope, only two words, then, if she wished, we’d never meet again! …I see you’re laughing…. Well, that’s why I told you about it, after all.” “Don’t be offended. I’m only laughing because you’re your own worst enemy. If you’d tried you’d have succeeded, maybe even in the street. The simpler, the easier…. No decent woman, unless she was dismally stupid or happened to be very irritated about something at that particular moment, would have refused you the two words for which you begged with such humility…. Although, after all, she might very well have taken you for a madman. I was thinking of how I would have reacted, but then I have quite a good idea of what life is all about.” “Oh, thank you, thank you!” I cried. “You have no idea what you’re doing for me!” “All right, all right. But tell me, what made you think I was the type of woman with whom…well, who would be worthy of…your attention, your friendship? How did you know that I was not just another housewife, as you put it? What made you decide to speak to me?” “What made me—why, you were alone, and that man was most indiscreet, and it’s nighttime…. I couldn’t have done anything else.” “No, no, before that, on the other sidewalk. Weren’t you thinking of speaking to me?” “On the other sidewalk? I really don’t know what to say. I was happy today. I was walking along and singing. I went beyond the city limits. I’d never before experienced such happy moments. And you—please excuse me, I may have imagined it, but I thought you were crying, and I couldn’t bear it…. My heart shrank…. Ah, God, why shouldn’t I be entitled to grieve with you? Why is it a sin for me to feel brotherly compassion for your sorrow? …Excuse me, I said compassion…. Well, I don’t see why it should offend you if I couldn’t resist my impulse to come over and talk to you.” “Enough, don’t talk of it any more.” She lowered her head, and her fingers pressed my arm. “It’s my fault for bringing it up, and I’m so pleased that it wasn’t a mistake…. But we’re almost at my place. I must turn here, into that street. It’s only a few steps from here. Good-by now, and thank you very much!” “But is it possible that we’ll never meet again? Can we leave it like this?” “But you said you were only after two words,” the girl said, laughing, “and now you… However, who can tell, perhaps we’ll meet again some day.” “I’ll be waiting here tomorrow. Forgive me, I seem to be demanding things already.” “Yes, you’re quite impatient, and you are almost demanding things—” “Listen, listen to me,” I interrupted her, “and forgive me if I say something wrong. You see, I can’t help coming here tomorrow. I’m simply a dreamer who has little real life, and moments like this are so rare in my existence that I must repeat them again and again in my thoughts. You’ll stay in my thoughts throughout the night—throughout a whole year. I’ll be here without fail tomorrow, in this very spot, at this very time—and I’ll be happy thinking of what happened today. Already this spot is dear to me. I have two or three spots like this in Petersburg. Once I even cried, like you…. Well, how can I know? Perhaps a few minutes ago you too were crying at the thought…Ah, forgive me, I’m forgetting myself again…. I simply meant, perhaps you were once especially happy here somehow….” “All right then,” the girl said, “I suppose I’ll be here tomorrow night too. At ten. I see I can’t stop you, and I have to come here anyway. But don’t think I’ve made a date with you. I warn you: I have to be here for my own reasons. So I may as well tell you now: I won’t mind if you’re here too, because that may save me an unpleasant incident like tonight’s. But that’s just incidental. To be brief, I’d be very pleased to see you… to say a couple of words to you. But I don’t want you to think badly of me. You mustn’t think that I make dates so easily. I would never have agreed to meet you again had it not been for…No, let it remain a secret! Only, from now on, let’s reach an agreement.” “An agreement? Just name it! I agree to anything in advance!” I said with ardor. “I assure you, I’ll be docile, respectful…you know me.” “It’s because I know you that I want you to come tomorrow,” the girl said, laughing. “And I know you fully. But if you come, it must be on my terms. First—and please do as I ask, for I’m being completely frank about it—don’t fall in love with me. You mustn’t, believe me. But I’d like us to be friends. Here, let’s shake hands on it. But, remember, no falling in love!” “I swear!” I shouted, taking her hand. “Stop, don’t swear so readily. I know very well that you can burst into flame in a second, like gunpowder—forgive me for saying so. Ah, if you knew…I, too—I have had no one with whom I could exchange a word, of whom to ask advice. Where could I look for advisors? Certainly not in the street. But you’re an exception. I know you as if we’d been friends for twenty years. Am I right in thinking you won’t let me down?” “You’ll see. Only I don’t know how I’ll keep myself alive, waiting for twenty-four hours.” “Sleep deeply. Good night, and remember I’ve put my trust in you. But you put it so well yourself: Does one really have to give an account of every feeling, even of brotherly compassion? You know, you put it so well that right away I decided to confide in you.” “For heaven’s sake, what is it? What?” “Tomorrow. Let it remain a secret for the moment. It’s better for you that way; at least from a distance all this may resemble a romance. I may tell you tomorrow and I may not. I’ll talk to you some more; well become better acquainted first.” “Well, I—I’ll tell you everything about myself tomorrow! But it’s as if a miracle were happening to me. Where am I? Oh, God! Tell me, are you glad you didn’t get angry with me and chase me away at first, as another woman would have done? It took you two minutes to make me happy once and for all. Yes, happy. Who knows, perhaps you’ve made me accept myself, maybe you’ve resolved my doubts. Perhaps such moods come over me that… Well, I’ll tell you everything tomorrow, you’ll know all….” “Good, I accept; and you’ll begin….” “Agreed.” “Good night.” “Good night.” We parted. I walked around all night. I couldn’t make myself go home. I was so happy…. Tomorrow!