continue..
can say about that. So listen, my friend Nastenka, for you’re still my friend—I am, of course, a simple man, poor and unimportant, but that’s not what matters (I keep straying from the subject out of shyness, Nastenka); only—I’d have loved you so much that even if you’d still gone on loving that man, you’d still never have felt my love as an imposition upon you. You’d only have heard a grateful, warm heart beating by your side and felt its proximity every second…. Ah, Nastenka, Nastenka, what have you done to me?” “Stop, I don’t want you to cry!” She got up quickly from the bench. “Come, get up, come with me, and stop crying! Stop it!” She dried my eyes with her handkerchief. “Come, perhaps I’ll tell you something. After all, he’s abandoned me, forgotten me, even though I still love him, for I don’t want to lie to you…. But tell me truly: if, for instance, I did come to love you—that is, if I only—oh, my dear, dear friend, when I think how I hurt you, when I laughed at your love, pretending to congratulate you for not falling in love with me—Ah, God, how could I have failed to foresee… How stupid I was! But now I’ve made up my mind—I’ll tell you everything.” “You know what, Nastenka, I’ll go away! I simply torment you when I’m near you. Now, because of me, you’re feeling guilty about making fun of me. But I don’t want to add to your sorrow. I am the guilty one, Nastenka, but forgive me and farewell!” “Wait, listen to me! Can’t you wait?” “Wait? Wait for what?” “I do love him but I’ll get over it. I’m bound to. In fact, I’m already getting over it. I feel it…. One can never tell, I might even overcome it today. Because I hate him—he was making fun of me while you and I were crying here together. Because you haven’t pushed me away as he has; because you love me, and he never loved me; because, finally I myself—I love you…. Yes—I love you—I love you the way you love me. Remember, I told you that before; you heard me! Because you’re a better man than he is; you’re more honorable; because he…” Nastenka was so moved that she couldn’t finish. She let her head rest on my shoulder; from there it slipped onto my chest as she shed bitter tears. I tried to cheer her up, but she couldn’t stop crying. She just kept pressing my hand and repeating between sobs: “Wait, wait, I’ll get over it in a moment…. Don’t think these tears mean that…I just feel weak….” Finally she stopped crying and wiped away her tears. We resumed our walk. I would have spoken, but she wanted me to wait a bit longer. So we walked in silence. At last she mustered up her courage and spoke. “You know,” she began in a weak, quivering voice that nevertheless had something in it that immediately clutched at my heart, making it throb with a sweet pain, “you mustn’t think I’m so fickle and irresponsible, that I’m so quick to forget and to betray. I’ve loved him for a whole year, and I swear to God that I’ve never, not once, been unfaithful to him. Not even in thought. But he’s scorned that; he’s made light of my feelings. Well, good luck to him! But he has also wounded me and slighted my love. No, I don’t love him, for I can only love one who is generous, understanding, and kind, because I myself am like that—so he’s unworthy of me. All right, I wish him all the best! It’s better like this than finding out later that I had deluded myself, than discovering too late what sort of man he is…. Anyway, it’s over! But come to think of it, my dear, maybe all my love for him was nothing but a delusion; maybe it began as a childish adventure; maybe it was caused by the wish to escape from under my grandmother’s thumb; maybe I was destined to love a man other than him, a man who could feel for me, understand me, and… But let’s leave that!” Nastenka was short of breath in her excitement. “All I want to say is that if, although I love—no, rather loved—him—although, you might say… If you think your love is great enough to displace my former love…If you will take pity on me and not leave me to face my destiny all alone without offering me consolation, support, and hope—if you’re willing to love me always as you love me now, then I swear to you that my gratitude—I mean my love—will, in the end, be worthy of your love…. Here, will you take my hand now?” “Nastenka!” I cried, choked with sobs, “Nastenka! Oh, Nastenka!” “Enough, enough for now, that’s definitely enough,” she said, getting hold of herself. “Everything has been said now, hasn’t it? Right? And you’re happy and so am I. Not another word about it. Wait. Spare me. For heaven’s sake talk of something else!” “Right, Nastenka, enough! I’m happy now, I…So, Nastenka, let’s talk of something else. Quickly. Yes, I’m ready….” We didn’t know what to say. We laughed. We cried. We exchanged thousands of disconnected, meaningless words. We walked along a street, then suddenly turned and retraced our steps. Without any apparent reason, we crossed the street to the opposite sidewalk; we went to the embankment…. We were like a couple of children. “I live all by myself now, Nastenka. But tomorrow…Of course, you know, I’m poor. I’ve only twelve hundred rubles, but it doesn’t matter, for—” “Of course not. And then my grandmother has a pension. So she won’t be a liability. She must, of course, come and live with us.” “Certainly, of course she must live with us. The only snag is that Matryona—” “Ah! And we have our Fyokla!” “Matryona’s kind. The only thing wrong with her is that she has absolutely no imagination. But it doesn’t matter!” “Never mind, they can live together. Anyway you’re coming over to live with us tomorrow.” “What did you say? Come to your place? That’s fine by me!” “Yes, you must rent our top-floor room. It’s empty now. There was an old woman living there, but she’s left, and I know Grandma wants to let it to a young man. I asked her, ‘Why a young man?’ and she said: ‘I’m getting old, see, but don’t you get it into your head, Nastenka, that I’m trying to marry you off.’ So I guessed that that was the reason.” “Ah, Nastenka!” We both laughed. “All right, that’s enough now,” she said. “And, by the way, where do you live? I’ve forgotten.” “Over there, by that bridge, in the Barashnikov House.” “The large house?” “Yes, it’s quite large.” “I know it. It’s a nice house, but forget it anyway and come and live with us. Quickly.” “I’ll come tomorrow, Nastenka, no later than tomorrow. I’m somewhat late with my rent, but that’ll be all right. I’ll be getting my pay soon.” “You know what? Perhaps I’ll give private lessons. First I’ll learn something myself, then I’ll teach it.” “It’s all turned out wonderfully…and soon I’m due for a bonus, Nastenka.” “Then, starting tomorrow, you’ll be my lodger.” “Yes, and well go to see The Barber of Seville, for they’ll be putting it on again soon.” “Yes, yes, let’s,” Nastenka said, laughing, “and if not The Barber, well go and see something else.” “All right, something else then. That would be better, of course. I should have thought of it myself….” Talking that way, we walked as if in a drunken haze, like walking through clouds, with no idea of what was going on around us. We stopped, chatted without moving from the spot, then set off walking again. God knows where, as we laughed, cried, and laughed again…. Nastenka decided to return home, and I didn’t dare detain her; I accompanied her to her very door, but a quarter of an hour later, we found ourselves back at our favorite bench. She sighed and a tear glistened in her eye again; I became frightened, turned cold… But she immediately pressed my hand and pulled me along behind her, and we again walked and chatted and talked…. “It’s time for me to go back home now,” Nastenka declared finally. “Enough of this childish stuff!” “All right, Nastenka, but I—I won’t be able to go to sleep tonight, so I don’t think I’ll go home.” “I don’t expect to sleep either. Nevertheless, I want you to see me to my door.” “Most certainly.” “But this time it must be for good.” “Yes, yes, of course.” “Do I have your promise? For I must get home in the end.” “I promise,” I said, laughing. “Then let’s go.” “Let’s go, Nastenka,” I said. “And look at the sky: it will