continue..
suspected him. “There is a man in the passage now,” said Mr. Tupman. “It’s the man I spoke to you about,” said Mr. Pickwick. “I sent for him up to the Borough this morning. Have the goodness to call him up, Snodgrass.” Mr. Snodgrass did as he was desired; and Mr. Samuel Weller forthwith presented himself. “Oh—you remember me, I suppose?” said Mr. Pickwick. “I should think so,” replied Sam, with a patronising wink. “Queer start that’ere, but he was one too many for you, warn’t he? Up to snuff and a pinch or two over—eh?” “Never mind that matter now,” said Mr. Pickwick hastily. “I want to speak to you about something else. Sit down.” “Thank’ee, sir,” said Sam. And down he sat without further bidding, having previously deposited his old white hat on the landing outside the door. “Ta’nt a werry good ‘un to look at,” said Sam, “but it’s an astonishin’ ’un to wear; and afore the brim went, it was a werry handsome tile. Hows’ever it’s lighter without it, that’s one thing, and every hole lets in some air, that’s another—wentilation gossamer I calls it.” On the delivery of this sentiment, Mr. Weller smiled agreeably upon the assembled Pickwickians. “Now with regard to the matter on which I, with the concurrence of these gentlemen, sent for you,” said Mr. Pickwick. “That’s the pint, sir,” interposed Sam; “out vith it, as the father said to the child, wen he swallowed a farden.” “We want to know in the first place,” said Mr. Pickwick, “whether you have any reason to be discontented with your present situation.” “Afore I answers that ’ere question, gen’l’m’n,” replied Mr. Weller, “I should like to know, in the first place, whether you’re a goin’ to purwide me with a better?” A sunbeam of placid benevolence played on Mr. Pickwick’s features as he said, “I have half made up my mind to engage you myself.” “Have you, though?” said Sam. Mr. Pickwick nodded in the affirmative. “Wages?” inquired Sam. “Twelve pounds a year,” replied Mr. Pickwick. “Clothes?” “Two suits.” “Work?” “To attend upon me; and travel about with me and these gentlemen here.” “Take the bill down,” said Sam, emphatically. “I’m let to a single gentleman, and the terms is agreed upon.” “You accept the situation?” inquired Mr. Pickwick. “Cert’nly,” replied Sam. “If the clothes fits me half as well as the place, they’ll do.” “You can get a character of course?” said Mr. Pickwick. “Ask the landlady o’ the White Hart about that, sir,” replied Sam. “Can you come this evening?” “I’ll get into the clothes this minute, if they’re here,” said Sam with great alacrity. “Call at eight this evening,” said Mr. Pickwick; “and if the inquiries are satisfactory, they shall be provided.” With the single exception of one amiable indiscretion, in which an assistant housemaid had equally participated, the history of Mr. Weller’s conduct was so very blameless, that Mr. Pickwick felt fully justified in closing the engagement that very evening. With the promptness and energy which characterized not only the public proceedings but all the private actions of this extraordinary man, he at once led his new attendant to one of those convenient emporiums where gentlemen’s new and second-hand clothes are provided, and the troublesome and inconvenient formality of measurement dispensed with; and before night had closed in, Mr. Weller was furnished with a grey coat with the P.C. button, a black hat with a cockade to it, a pink striped waistcoat, light breeches and gaiters, and a variety of other necessaries, too numerous to recapitulate. “Well,” said that suddenly transformed individual, as he took his seat on the outside of the Eatanswill coach next morning, “I wonder whether I’m meant to be a footman, or a groom, or a gamekeeper, or a seedsman. I looks like a sort of compo of every one on ’em. Never mind; there’s change of air, plenty to see, and little to do; and all this suits my complaint uncommon; so long life to the Pickvicks, says I!” [After several Pickwickian adventures, in the course of which Sam and Mr. Pickwick are bound in mutual affection, Sam delivers a letter.] Mr. Pickwick would in all probability have gone on for some time, had not the entrance of Sam, with a letter, caused him to break off in his eloquent discourse. He passed his handkerchief across his forehead, took off his spectacles, wiped them, and put them on again; and his voice had recovered its wonted softness of tone when he said: “What have you there, Sam?” “Called at the Post-office just now, and found this here letter, as has laid there for two days,” replied Mr. Weller. “It’s sealed with a vafer, and directed in round hand.” “I don’t know this hand,” said Mr. Pickwick, opening the letter. “Mercy on us; what’s this? It must be a jest; it—it—can’t be true.” “What’s the matter?” was the general inquiry. “Nobody dead, is there?” said Wardle, alarmed at the horror in Mr. Pickwick’s countenance. Mr. Pickwick made no reply, but, pushing the letter across the table, and desiring Mr. Tupman to read it aloud, fell back in his chair with a look of vacant astonishment quite alarming to behold. Mr. Tupman, with a trembling voice, read the letter, of which the following is a copy: Letter ```We are, Sir, Your obedient servants, Dodson and Fogg Freeman’s Court, Cornhill, August 28th, 1830. Bardell against Pickwick Sir, Having been instructed by Mrs. Martha Bardell to commence an action against you for a breach of promise of marriage, for which the plaintiff lays her damages at fifteen hundred pounds, we beg to inform you that a writ has been issued against you in this suit in the Court of Common Pleas; and request to know, by return of post, the name of your attorney in London, who will accept service thereof. Mr. Samuel Pickwick``` There was something so impressive in the mute astonishment with which each man regarded his neighbour, and every man regarded Mr. Pickwick, that all seemed afraid to speak. The silence was at length broken by Mr. Tupman. “Dodson and Fogg,” he repeated mechanically. “Bardell and Pickwick,” said Mr. Snodgrass, musing. “Peace of mind and happiness of confiding females,” murmured Mr. Winkle, with an air of abstraction. “It’s a conspiracy,” said Mr. Pickwick, at length recovering the power of speech; “a base conspiracy between these two grasping attorneys, Dodson and Fogg. Mrs. Bardell would never do it—she hasn’t the heart to do it—she hasn’t the case to do it. Ridiculous—ridiculous.” “Of her heart,” said Wardle, with a smile, “you should certainly be the best judge. I don’t wish to discourage you, but I should certainly say that, of her case, Dodson and Fogg are far better judges than any of us can be.” “It’s a vile attempt to extort money,” said Mr. Pickwick. “I hope it is,” said Wardle, with a short, dry cough. “Who ever heard me address her in any way but that in which a lodger would address his landlady?” continued Mr. Pickwick, with great vehemence. “Who ever saw me with her? Not even my friends here—” “Except on one occasion,” said Mr. Tupman. Mr. Pickwick changed colour. “Ah,” said Mr. Wardle. “Well, that’s important. There was nothing suspicious then, I suppose?” Mr. Tupman glanced timidly at his leader. “Why,” said he, “there was nothing suspicious; but—I don’t know how it happened, mind—she certainly was reclining in his arms.” “Gracious powers!” ejaculated Mr. Pickwick, as the recollection of the scene in question struck forcibly upon him; “what a dreadful instance of the force of circumstances! So she was—so she was.” “And our friend was soothing her anguish,” said Mr. Winkle, rather maliciously. “So I was,” said Mr. Pickwick. “I won’t deny it. So I was.” “Hallo!” said Wardle; “for a case in which there’s nothing suspicious, this looks rather queer—eh, Pickwick? Ah, sly dog—sly dog!” and he laughed till the glasses on the sideboard rang again. “What a dreadful conjunction of appearances!” exclaimed Mr. Pickwick, resting his chin upon his hands. “Winkle—Tupman—I beg your pardon for the observations I made just now. We are all the victims of circumstances, and I the greatest.” With this apology Mr. Pickwick buried his head in his hands, and ruminated; while Wardle measured out a regular circle of nods and winks, addressed to the other members of the company. “I’ll have it explained, though,” said Mr. Pickwick, raising his head and hammering the table. “I’ll see this Dodson and Fogg! I’ll go to London tomorrow.” “Not to-morrow,” said Wardle; “you’re too lame.” “Well, then, next day.” “Next day is the first of September, and you’re pledged to ride out with us, as far as Sir Geoffrey Manning’s grounds, at all events, and to meet us at lunch, if you don’t take the field.” “Well, then, the day after,” said Mr. Pickwick; “Thursday. Sam!” “Sir,” replied Mr. Weller. “Take two places outside to London, on Thursday morning, for