continue..
Nastenka said, “that hadn’t even occurred to me. Of course—anything could have happened.” Her tone was extremely co-operative, but I detected a jarring, discordant note in it, an echo of thoughts of a different kind. “Here’s what we’ll do,” she said. “You’ll go there tomorrow as early as you can, and if there’s something, you’ll let me know immediately. You know where I live, of course.” And she repeated her address. Then she became breathtakingly tender and at the same time shy…. I thought she was attentively following what I was saying, but when I asked her some question, she said nothing, became embarrassed, and turned her head away from me. I looked into her eyes. That was it—she was crying. “You mustn’t, you mustn’t! Ah, you’re behaving like a child. You’re just a baby!” She tried to smile to control herself, but her chin was trembling and her bosom heaving. “I’ve been thinking of you,” she said after a moment’s silence. “You’ve been so kind that I’d have to be made of stone not to be touched. And, you know, I compared the two of you and decided that you are the better of the two, although I love him more.” I didn’t answer. She seemed to expect me to say something. “Of course, I may still not understand him or know him perfectly,” she said. “Come to think of it, I’ve always been afraid of him. He’s always been so grave, so proud in a way. Of course, I know that it’s only the way he looks, that there’s more tenderness in his heart than in my own…. I remember how he looked at me when—remember?—I came to his room with that bundle. Still, I look up to him with respect, which may mean we aren’t equals, don’t you think?” “No, Nastenka, no, it simply means that you love him more than anything in the world, and much more than yourself.” “All right, let’s assume you’re right,” naïve Nastenka replied. “But shall I tell you what has just occurred to me? All right. Only I won’t talk about myself now but speak in general, for this thought has recurred to me several times. Tell me, why aren’t we all like brothers? Why does even the best person hold back something from another? Why not say directly what we feel if we know that what we entrust won’t be scattered to the winds? As it is, everyone looks much tougher than he really is, as if he felt it’d be an insult to his feelings if he expressed them too readily—” “Ah, that’s it exactly, Nastenka,” I interrupted her, doing more violence than ever to my own feelings, “and it’s due to many causes—” “No, no!” she said heatedly. “Take you, for instance—you’re not like the rest. I don’t quite know how to explain it…but I feel…yes, even now, you are sacrificing something for my sake.” She shyly cast a sidelong glance at me. “Forgive me for speaking to you like this, but I’m a simple girl who hasn’t seen much in this world yet, and there are times when I can’t talk.” Her voice trembled with some hidden emotion and, at the same time, she tried to smile. “All I wanted to tell you was that I’m grateful, that I too—I feel all that—Ah, may God reward you with happiness! But what you told me before about that dreamer of yours, that’s untrue. I mean, it has absolutely nothing to do with you. You’re recovering now; you’re really a completely different person from the one you tried to pass yourself off as. If you ever fall in love, may you be happy with her! And I don’t have to wish her anything, for I know shell be happy with you. I know it, for I’m a woman myself, and you must believe me….” She fell silent and squeezed my hand. I couldn’t utter a word. Several minutes went by. “Well, it doesn’t look as though he’s coming tonight,” she said at last, lifting her head. “It’s getting quite late.” “He’ll be here tomorrow,” I said in a firm, convincing voice. “Yes,” she said, growing suddenly cheerful, “I can see now that he’ll come tomorrow. So good night, see you tomorrow. If it rains, I may not come. But the night after that I’ll be here, without fail, whatever happens. You must be here too; I want to see you and tell you everything.” When we were saying good-by, she gave me her hand, looked at me brightly, and said: “We’ll always be together now, won’t we?” Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka! if you had any idea how lonely I feel! When it struck nine I couldn’t stand it in my room. I dressed and went out. I walked over to our spot and sat on our bench. Then I walked along her street, but I felt ashamed and, before I’d quite reached her house, turned back without even glancing at the windows. I returned home in a state of dejection such as I’d never known before. What gloomy, damp, depressing weather! If only it had been fine I’d have walked around her neighborhood all night. But she’ll tell me everything tomorrow. Of course, there wasn’t any letter today, but then, that’s quite natural. They’re together already.