Work: Dante Field: dante Author: Thomas Stearns Eliot Title: THE “PURGATORIO” AND THE “PARADISO” For the science or art of writing verse, one has learned from the Inferno that the greatest poetry can be written with the greatest economy of words, and with the greatest austerity in the use of metaphor, simile, verbal beauty, and elegance. When I affirm that more can be learned about how to write poetry from Dante than from any English poet, I do not at all mean that Dante’s way is the only right way, or that Dante is thereby greater than Shakespeare or, indeed, any other English poet. I put my meaning into other words by saying that Dante can do less harm to any one trying to learn to write verse than can Shakespeare. Most great English poets are inimitable in a way in which Dante was not. If you try to imitate Shakespeare you will certainly produce a series of stilted, forced, and violent distortions of language. The language of each great English poet is his own language; the language of Dante is the perfection of a common language. In a sense, it is more pedestrian than that of Dryden or Pope. If you follow Dante without talent, you will at worst be pedestrian and flat; if you follow Shakespeare or Pope without talent, you will make an utter fool of yourself. But if one has learned this much from the Inferno, there are other things to be learnt from the two successive divisions of the poem. From the Purgatorio one learns that a straightforward philosophical statement can be great poetry; from the Paradiso, that more and more rarefied and remote states of beatitude can be the material for great poetry. And gradually we come to admit that Shakespeare understands a greater extent and variety of human life than Dante; but that Dante understands deeper degrees of degradation and higher degrees of exaltation. And a further wisdom is reached when we see clearly that this indicates the equality of the two men. On the one hand, the Purgatorio and the Paradiso belong, in the way of understanding, together. It is apparently easier to accept damnation as poetic material than purgation or beatitude; less is involved that is strange to the modern mind. I insist that the full meaning of the Inferno can only be extracted after appreciation of the two later parts, yet it has sufficient meaning in and by itself for the first few readings. Indeed, the Purgatorio is, I think, the most difficult of the three parts. It cannot be enjoyed by itself like the Inferno, nor can it be enjoyed merely as a sequel to the Inferno; it requires appreciation of the Paradiso as well; which means that its first reading is arduous and apparently unremunerative. Only when we have read straight through to the end of the Paradiso, and re-read the Inferno, does the Purgatorio begin to yield its beauty. Damnation and even blessedness are more exciting than purgation. By compensation, the Purgatorio has a few episodes which, so to speak, “let us up” (as the counterpart to letting down) more easily than the rest, from the Inferno. We must not stop to orient ourselves in the new astronomy of the Mount of Purgatory. We must linger first with the shades of Casella and Manfred slain, and especially Buonconte and La Pia, those whose souls were saved from Hell only at the last moment. Poem ```“Io fui di Montefeltro, io son Buonconte; Giovanna o altri non ha di me cura; perch’ io vo tra costor con bassa fronte.” Ed io a lui: “Qual forza o qual ventura ti traviò si fuor di Campaldino che non si seppe mai tua sepoltura?” “Oh,” rispos’ egli, “a piè del Casentino traversa ur’ acqua che ha nome l’Archiano, che sopra l’Ermo nasce in Apennino. Dove il vocabol suo diventa vano arriva’ io forato nella gola, fuggendo a piede e sanguinando il piano. Quivi perdei la vista, e la parola nel nome di Maria finii: e quivi caddi, e rimase la mia carne sola.”``` “I was of Montefeltro, I am Buonconte; neither Giovanna nor any other has care of me, wherefore I go with these, with lowered brow.” I said to him: “What force or chance led you so far away from Campaldino that your place of sepulture has always been unknown?” “Oh,” said he, “at the foot of Casentino a stream crosses, which is called Archiano, and rises in the Apennines above the Hermitage. There, where its name is lost, came I, jabbed in the throat, fleeing on foot, dripping blood over the plain. There my sight left me, and I ended speech with [crying on] the name of Mary. There I fell, and my flesh alone remained.” When Buonconte ends his story, the third spirit speaks: Poem ```“Deh, quando tu sarai tornato al mondo, e riposato della lunga via,” seguito il terzo spirito al secondo, “ricorditi di me, che son la Pia; Siena mi fe’, disfecemi Maremma: salsi colui che innanellata, pria disposando, m’avea con la sua gemma.”``` “O pray, when you return to the world, and are rested from your long journey,” followed the third spirit after the second, “remember me, who am La Pia. Siena made me, Maremma unmade me: this is known to him who after due engagement wedded me with his ring.” The next episode that impresses the reader coming fresh from the Inferno is the meeting with Sordello the poet (Canto vi), the soul who appeared Poem ```altera e disdegnosa e nel mover degli occhi onesta e tarda!``` Proud and disdainful, superb and slow in the movement of his eyes! Poem ```E il dolce duca incominciava: “Mantova”…e l’ombra, tutta in sè romita, surse ver lui del loco ove pria stava, dicendo: “O Mantovano, io son Sordello della tua terra.” E l’un l’altro abbracciava.``` The gentle guide [Virgil] began: “Mantua”…and the shade, suddenly rapt, leapt towards him from the place where first it was, saying, “O Mantuan, I am Sordello of thy very soil.” And the one embraced the other. The meeting with Sordello a guisa di leon quando si posa, like a couchant lion, is no more affecting than that with the poet Statius, in Canto xxi. Statius, when he recognizes his master Virgil, stoops to clasp his feet, but Virgil answers—the lost soul speaking to the saved: Poem ```“Frate, non far, chè tu se’ ombra, ed ombra vedi.” Ed ei surgendo: “Or puoi la quantitate comprender dell’ amor ch’ a te mi scalda, quando dismento nostra vanitate, trattando l’ombre come cosa salda.”``` “Brother! refrain, for you are but a shadow, and a shadow is but what you see.” Then the other, rising: “Now can you understand the quantity of love that warms me towards you, so that I forget our vanity, and treat the shadows like the solid thing.” The last “episode” at all comparable to those of the Inferno is the meeting with Dante’s predecessors, Guido Guinizelli and Arnaut Daniel (Canto xxvi). In this canto the Lustful are purged in flame, yet we see clearly how the flame of purgatory differs from that of hell. In hell, the torment issues from the very nature of the damned themselves, expresses their essence; they writhe in the torment of their own perpetually perverted nature. In purgatory the torment of flame is deliberately and consciously accepted by the penitent. When Dante approaches with Virgil these souls in purgatory flame, they crowd towards him: Poem ```Poi verso me, quanto potevan farsi, certi si feron, sempre con riguardo di non uscir dove non fossero arsi.``` Then certain of them made towards me, so far as they could, but ever watchful not to come so far that they should not be in the fire. The souls in purgatory suffer because they wish to suffer, for purgation. And observe that they suffer more actively and keenly, being souls preparing for blessedness, than Virgil suffers in eternal limbo. In their suffering is hope, in the anaesthesia of Virgil is hopelessness; that is the difference. The canto ends with the superb verses of Arnaut Daniel in his Provençal tongue: Poem ```“Ieu sui Arnaut, que plor e vau cantan; consiros vei la passada folor, e vei jausen lo jorn, qu’ esper, denan. Ara vos prec, per aquella valor que vos guida al som de l’escalina, sovegna vos a temps de ma dolor.” P oi s’ ascose nel foco che gli affina .``` “I am Arnold, who weeps and goes singing. I see in thought all the past folly. And I see with joy the day for which I hope, before me. And so I pray you, by that Virtue which leads you to the topmost of the stair—be mindful in due time of my pain.” Then dived he back into that fire which refines them. These are the high episodes, to which the reader initiated by the Inferno must first cling, until he reaches the shore of Lethe, and Matilda, and the first sight