continue..
“Please, Auntie says—will you try a piece of our May-day cake?” “If I may come to the kitchen for it.” “Oh, yes! You’ll be missing your friend.” “Not I. But are you sure no one minds?” “Who would mind? We shall be very pleased.” Ashurst rose too suddenly for his stiff knee, staggered and subsided. The girl gave a little gasp, and held out her hands. Ashurst took them, small, rough, brown; checked his impulse to put them to his lips, and let her pull him up. She came close beside him, offering her shoulder. And leaning on her he walked across the room. That shoulder seemed quite the pleasantest thing he had ever touched. But he had presence of mind enough to catch his stick out of the rack, and withdraw his hand before arriving at the kitchen. That night he slept like a top, and woke with his knee of almost normal size. He again spent the morning in his chair on the grass patch, scribbling down verses; but in the afternoon he wandered about with the two little boys Nick and Rick. It was Saturday, so they were early home from school; quick, shy, dark little rascals of seven and six, soon talkative, for Ashurst had a way with children. By four o’clock they had shown him all their methods of destroying life, except the tickling of trout; and with breeches tucked up, lay on their stomachs over the trout stream, pretending they had this accomplishment also. They tickled nothing, of course, for their giggling and shouting scared every spotted thing away. Ashurst, on a rock at the edge of the beech clump, watched them, and listened to the cuckoos, till Nick, the elder and less persevering, came up and stood beside him. “The gypsy bogle zets on that stone,” he said. “What gypsy bogle?” “Dunno; never zeen ’e. Megan zays ’e zets there; an’ old Jim zeed ’e once. ’E was zettin’ there naight afore our pony kicked-in father’s ’ead. ’E plays the viddle.” “What tune does he play?” “Dunno.” “What’s he like?” “’E’s black. Old Jim zays ’e’s all over ’air. ’E’s a praaper bogle. ’E don’ come only at naight.” The little boy’s oblique dark eyes slid round. “D’yu think ’e might want to take me away? Megan’s feared of ’e.” “Has she seen him?” “No. She’s not afeared o’ yu.” “I should think not. Why should she be?” “She zays a prayer for yu.” “How do you know that, you little rascal?” “When I was asleep, she said: ‘God bless us all, an’ Mr. Ashes.’ I ’eard ’er whisperin’.” “You’re a little ruffian to tell what you hear when you’re not meant to hear it!” The little boy was silent. Then he said aggressively: “I can skin rabbets. Megan, she can’t bear skinnin’ ’em. I like blood.” “Oh! you do; you little monster!” “What’s that?” “A creature that likes hurting others.” The little boy scowled. “They’m only dead rabbets, what us eats.” “Quite right, Nick. I beg your pardon.” “I can skin frogs, tu.” But Ashurst had become absent. “God bless us all, and Mr. Ashes!” And puzzled by that sudden inaccessibility, Nick ran back to the stream where the giggling and shouts again uprose at once. When Megan brought his tea, he said: “What’s the gypsy bogle, Megan?” She looked up, startled. “He brings bad things.” “Surely you don’t believe in ghosts?” “I hope I will never see him.” “Of course you won’t. There aren’t such things. What old Jim saw was a pony.” “No! There are bogles in the rocks; they are the men who lived long ago.” “They aren’t gypsies, anyway; those old men were dead long before gypsies came.” She said simply: “They are all bad.” “Why? If there are any, they’re only wild, like the rabbits. The flowers aren’t bad for being wild; the thorn-trees were never planted—and you don’t mind them. I shall go down at night and look for your bogle, and have a talk with him.” “Oh, no! Oh, no!” “Oh, yes! I shall go and sit on his rock.” She clasped her hands together: “Oh, please!” “Why! What does it matter if anything happens to me?” She did not answer; and in a sort of pet he added: “Well, I daresay I shan’t see him, because I suppose I must be off soon.” “Soon?” “Your aunt won’t want to keep me here.” “Oh, yes! We always let lodgings in summer.” Fixing his eyes on her face, he asked: “Would you like me to stay?” “Yes.” “I’m going to say a prayer for you to-night!” She flushed crimson, frowned, and went out of the room. He sat cursing himself, till his tea was stewed. It was as if he had hacked with his thick boots at a clump of blue-bells. Why had he said such a silly thing? Was he just a towny college ass like Robert Garton, as far from understanding this girl? Ashurst spent the next week confirming the restoration of his leg, by exploration of the country within easy reach. Spring was a revelation to him this year. In a kind of intoxication he would watch the pink-white buds of some backward beech-tree sprayed up in the sunlight against the deep blue sky, or the trunks and limbs of the few Scotch firs, tawny in violent light, or again on the moor, the gale-bent larches which had such a look of life when the wind streamed in their young green, above the rusty black under-boughs. Or he would lie on the banks, gazing at the clusters of dog-violets, or up in the dead bracken, fingering the pink, transparent buds of the dew-berry, while the cuckoos called and yaffles laughed, or a lark, from very high, dripped its beads of song. It was certainly different from any spring he had ever known, for spring was within him, not without. In the daytime he hardly saw the family; and when Megan brought in his meals she always seemed too busy in the house or among the young things in the yard to stay talking long. But in the evenings he installed himself in the window seat in the kitchen, smoking and chatting with the lame man Jim, or Mrs. Narracombe, while the girl sewed, or moved about, clearing the supper things away. And sometimes with the sensation a cat must feel when it purrs, he would become conscious that Megan’s eyes—those dew-grey eyes—were fixed on him with a sort of lingering soft look which was strangely flattering. It was on Sunday week in the evening, when he was lying in the orchard listening to a blackbird and composing a love poem, that he heard the gate swing to, and saw the girl come running among the trees, with the red-cheeked, stolid Joe in swift pursuit. About twenty yards away the chase ended, and the two stood fronting each other, not noticing the stranger in the grass—the boy pressing on, the girl fending him off. Ashurst could see her face, angry, disturbed; and the youth’s—who would have thought that red-faced yokel could look so distraught! And painfully affected by that sight, he jumped up. They saw him then. Megan dropped her hands, and shrank behind a tree-trunk; the boy gave an angry grunt, rushed at the bank, scrambled over and vanished. Ashurst went slowly up to her. She was standing quite still, biting her lip—very pretty, with her fine, dark hair blown loose about her face, and her eyes cast down. “I beg your pardon,” he said. She gave him one upward look, from eyes much dilated; then, catching her breath, turned away. Ashurst followed. “Megan!” But she went on; and taking hold of her arm, he turned her gently round to him. “Stop and speak to me.” “Why do you beg my pardon? It is not to me you should do that.” “Well, then, to Joe.” “How dare he come after me?” “In love with you, I suppose.” She stamped her foot. Ashurst uttered a short laugh. “Would you like me to punch his head?” She cried with sudden passion: “You laugh at me—you laugh at us!” He caught hold of her hands, but she shrank back, till her passionate little face and loose dark hair were caught among the pink clusters of the apple-blossom. Ashurst raised one of her imprisoned hands and put his lips to it. He felt how chivalrous he was, and superior to that clod Joe—just brushing that small, rough hand with his mouth! Her shrinking ceased suddenly; she seemed to tremble towards him. A sweet warmth overtook Ashurst from top to toe. This slim maiden, so simple and fine and pretty, was pleased, then, at the touch of his lips. And, yielding to a swift impulse, he put his arms round her, pressed her to him, and kissed her forehead. Then he was frightened—she went so pale, closing her eyes, so that the long, dark lashes lay on her