continue..
much earlier, though less accurately, by astronomical observation. It is quite clear that in view of its enormous magnitude, the velocity of light could be measured only by taking distances comparable to that between the earth and another planet of the solar system or by a great refinement of experimental technique. The first method was that of Roemer, the second that of Fizeau. Since the days of these first experiments the very important number representing the velocity of light has been determined many times, with increasing accuracy. In our own century a highly refined technique was devised for this purpose by Michelson. The result of these experiments can be expressed simply: The velocity of light in vacuo is approximately 186,000 miles per second, or 300,000 kilometers per second. Light as Substance. Again we start with a few experimental facts. The number just quoted concerns the velocity of light in vacuo. Undisturbed, light travels with this speed through empty space. We can see through an empty glass vessel if we extract the air from it. We see planets, stars, nebulae, although the light travels from them to our eyes through empty space. The simple fact that we can see through a vessel whether or not there is air inside shows us that the presence of air matters very little. For this reason we can perform optical experiments in an ordinary room with the same effect as if there were no air. One of the simplest optical facts is that the propagation of light is rectilinear. We shall describe a primitive and naïve experiment showing this. In front of a point source is placed a screen with a hole in it. A point source is a very small source of light, say, a small opening in a closed lantern. On a distant wall the hole in the screen will be represented as light on a dark background. The next drawing [p. 544] shows how this phenomenon is connected with the rectilinear propagation of light. All such phenomena, even the more complicated cases in which light, shadow, and half-shadows appear, can be explained by the assumption that light, in vacuo or in air, travels along straight lines. Let us take another example, a case in which light passes through matter. We have a light beam traveling through a vacuum and falling on a glass plate. What happens? If the law of rectilinear motion were still valid, the path would be that shown by the dotted line. But actually it is not. There is a break in the path, such as is shown in the drawing [below]. What we observe here is the phenomenon known as refraction. The familiar appearance of a stick which seems to be bent in the middle if half-immersed in water is one of the many manifestations of refraction. These facts are sufficient to indicate how a simple mechanical theory of light could be devised. Our aim here is to show how the ideas of sub- stances, particles, and forces penetrated the field of optics, and how finally the old philosophical point of view broke down. The theory here suggests itself in its simplest and most primitive form. Let us assume that all lighted bodies emit particles of light, or corpuscles, which, falling on our eyes, create the sensation of light. We are already so accustomed to introduce new substances, if necessary for a mechanical explanation, that we can do it once more without any great hesitation. These corpuscles must travel along straight lines through empty space with a known speed, bringing to our eyes messages from the bodies emitting light. All phenomena exhibiting the rectilinear propagation of light support the corpuscular theory, for just this kind of motion was prescribed for the corpuscles. The theory also explains very simply the reflection of light by mirrors as the same kind of reflection as that shown in the mechanical experiment of elastic balls thrown against a wall, as the next drawing indicates. The explanation of refraction is a little more difficult. Without going into details we can see the possibility of a mechanical explanation. If corpuscles fall on the surface of glass, for example, it may be that a force is exerted on them by the particles of the matter, a force which strangely enough acts only in the immediate neighborhood of matter. Any force acting on a moving particle changes the velocity, as we already know. If the net force on the light-corpuscles is an attraction perpendicular to the surface of the glass, the new motion will lie somewhere between the line of the original path and the perpendicular. This simple explanation seems to promise success for the corpuscular theory of light. To determine the usefulness and range of validity of the theory, however, we must investigate new and more complicated facts. The Riddle of Color. It was again Newton’s genius which explained for the first time the wealth of color in the world. Here is a description of one of Newton’s experiments in his own words: In the year 1666 (at which time I applied myself to the grinding of optick glasses of other figures than spherical) I procured me a triangular glass prism, to try therewith the celebrated phenomena of colours. And in order thereto, having darkened my chamber, and made a small hole in my window-shuts, to let in a convenient quantity of the sun’s light, I placed my prism at its entrance, that it might thereby be refracted to the opposite wall. It was at first a very pleasing divertisement, to view the vivid and intense colours produced thereby. The light from the sun is “white.” After passing through a prism it shows all the colors which exist in the visible world. Nature herself reproduces the same result in the beautiful color scheme of the rainbow. Attempts to explain this phenomenon are very old. The Biblical story that a rainbow is God’s signature to a covenant with man is, in a sense, a “theory.” But it does not satisfactorily explain why the rainbow is repeated from time to time, and why always in connection with rain. The whole puzzle of color was first scientifically attacked and the solution pointed out in the great work of Newton. One edge of the rainbow is always red and the other violet. Between them all other colors are arranged. Here is Newton’s explanation of this phenomenon: every color is already present in white light. They all traverse interplanetary space and the atmosphere in unison and give the effect of white light. White light is, so to speak, a mixture of corpuscles of different kinds, belonging to different colors. In the case of Newton’s experiment the prism separates them in space. According to the mechanical theory, refraction is due to forces acting on the particles of light and originating from the particles of glass. These forces are different for corpuscles belonging to different colors, being strongest for the violet and weakest for the red. Each of the colors will therefore be refracted along a different path and be separated from the others when the light leaves the prism. In the case of a rainbow, drops of water play the role of the prism. The substance theory of light is now more complicated than before. We have not one light substance but many, each belonging to a different color. If, however, there is some truth in the theory, its consequences must agree with observation. The series of colors in the white light of the sun, as revealed by Newton’s experiment, is called the spectrum of the sun, or more precisely, its visible spectrum. The decomposition of white light into its components, as described here, is called the dispersion of light. The separated colors of the spectrum could be mixed together again by a second prism properly adjusted, unless the explanation given is wrong. The process should be just the reverse of the previous one. We should obtain white light from the previously separated colors. Newton showed by experiment that it is indeed possible to obtain white light from its spectrum and the spectrum from white light in this simple way as many times as one pleases. These experiments formed a strong support for the theory in which corpuscles belonging to each color behave as unchangeable substances. Newton wrote thus: …which colours are not new generated, but only made apparent by being parted; for if they be again entirely mixt and blended together, they will again compose that colour, which they did before separation. And for the same reason, transmutations made by the convening of divers colours are not real; for when the difform rays are again severed, they will exhibit the very same colours which they did before they entered the composition; as you see blue and yellow powders, when finely mixed, appear to the naked eye, green, and yet the colours of the component corpuscles are not thereby really transmuted, but only blended. For when viewed with a good microscope they