Work: Mathematics, in Life and Thought Field: mathematics, in life and thought Author: Andrew Russell Forsyth There is an ancient adage, certainly as old as the naturalist Pliny, who perished in the famous eruption of Vesuvius, that “a shoemaker should not look above his last.” The wisdom of the adage is always being ignored. The newspapers give evidence of the neglect in their daily spate of ingenuous letters. Every publishing season adds to the evidence by the recurring deluge of new books which seem no nearer an end now than they were in the days of the troubled preacher who, like many another student, found much study a weariness of the flesh. The neglect is not unknown even in the range of occasional lecturers of the strictest academic credentials. Physicists, whose main concern has been with the inanimate matter of the universe, have been heard to pontificate on the origins of life and its continuity after death. Men of science will discourse on philosophy with no more success and no more clarity than are achieved by Beatrice in Dante’s Divina Commedia. Philosophers, in all the precision of metaphysics, will enunciate canons for the progress of observational science. Nay, theologians have been known to formulate fundamental principles which, as being the eternal verities, are the unchanging limits of scientific attainment. Even the citizen in the bus will settle the policy of a nation, though his knowledge of an issue at stake could be written on a picture postcard, leaving plenty of space for the picture. So let me, very respectfully, for once be the obedient shoemaker of the adage, not look above my last, and offer you a sample of my own wares. The subject of mathematics, to some aspects of which my lecture will invite your attention, is regarded variously: sometimes with respect, rising through awe to wonder; sometimes with dislike, degenerating through repulsion to hatred. Occasionally it is regarded as a key, even as the guide, to trustworthy knowledge; sometimes as the dismal process of calculations to be performed by hired computers. In any event, why take it as the matter of a lecture? For there are at least two diverging views as to the nature of such a performance. One view is that the lecture should give a tabloid summary of what is hidden in books that are not read: yet, in the case of my choice, who wants a summary of what seems the infinitely arid and the absolutely incomprehensible, as so obviously appears whenever a mathematical book is opened? Another view is that the lecture should give what is not to be found in any of the books, so that the exposition of novelties shall induce, in a sympathetic listener, the frame of mind that is willing to acquire fuller knowledge through patient labour. On this view the listener must indeed be sympathetic, very willing to provide the patient labour for the acquisition of mathematical knowledge: for he will find, as Euclid told a bored and discontented pupil in words that have lived for more than two thousand years, “There is no royal road to learning.” My purpose differs from both of these implied aims. It is to invite you to note one or two of the uses, some simple, some recondite, of mathematics, and, by noting them, to attempt an appreciation of the issues which are forced into daily discussion and daily action. For the ordinary course of affairs a great English divine declared that “probability is the very guide of life.” Usually certainty is lacking: and probability can be taken as the only reasonable guide amid an occasional maze of possibilities. Yet, when sifted and analysed, this probability often reduces itself to a more or less mathematical (chiefly, I fear, less mathematical) measure of moral and material advantages to follow. The spirit of mathematics, if not its method, dominates the sifting analysis: we can sometimes regret that the method is lacking. Let me offer a couple of illustrations. Some of you may remember a legend of wide circulation in 1914 before the Great War was many weeks old: how a force of 80,000 Russians had been landed in the north of England, transported from the north-east coast to Portsmouth, and thence shipped to France. The moral support of those Russians was a comforting belief at the moment. There had been days, only a human generation earlier, when everything Russian had been anathema to patriotic Englishmen: but those days were past. Though we might be martially arrogant enough to feel that we did not need the help, it still was good to think that we had it: so comforting that the news was accepted without question. Retired military men in clubs, an unfailing source of trustworthy wisdom, were supposed to know it: the unverified gossip of the smoking-room gathered confidence in statement as it spread: the good news was believed. I was staying on the Dorsetshire coast at the time: and during a week-end a visitor brought information from a London club that the stationmaster at Dorchester had seen the Russians pass through his station in the train. My mathematical scepticism was roused: my informant, by successive queries mildly posed, was induced to estimate the number of men in a compartment, the number of compartments in a carriage, the number of carriages in a train even in a period of emergency, and the consequent number of trains needed to convey the said 80,000 Russians. When, on the basis of his own estimates, he informed me (correctly) that over one hundred trains would be required for the transport, I asked him whether the Dorchester stationmaster had seen over one hundred trains pass through his station. His answer was blank silence: for him, as for me, the Russians vanished into thin air—a little salutary arithmetic had dissipated a hopelessly false legend that was fostering false confidence. Probability had not been the guide of my informant’s judgment. I suppose that, in Swansea as in other communities, considerable industry is devoted by eager optimists to competitions anticipating the results of football matches. Newspapers (all of them prudent enough to insure against loss in the venture) vie with one another in offering large sums of money for merely filling up slips of paper: in those slips entries are to be made estimating the result for each one of a dozen matches, a win, or a draw, or a loss, for a specified side. To the person who anticipates all the twelve results correctly, a large sum of money is paid. So the competitors, eager for wealth but niggardly in constructive labour, spend long periods in hatching their prophetic guesses. It is not a game: it is not a business; it is a gamble. I sometimes wonder whether the competitors have the faintest idea of the minuteness of the chance of individual success in the competition, if it can be dignified by such a title. There are more than four thousand different ways of getting every guess wrong; there are more ways of getting eight guesses wrong and the other four right than there are of getting any other distribution; there are more than half a million ways of having one or more errors in the selection: there is only one way of getting them all right. Need I say more? To this fatuous occupation, Bishop Butler might have hesitated before declaring probability to be the very guide of life. Let us pass to consider matters somewhat more serious and more precise. A copious definition of mathematics can be given by describing it as the craft of counting as in the arithmetic of daily life, as the craft of measuring as in the original needs of surveying and engineering, as the craft of observing and noting as in the early days of astronomy. When the simple processes of counting, of measuring, and of recording observations are pursued systematically, it is found that the repetition of some particular issue requires the particular Repetition of some unchanging and appropriate process—a rule is evolved: the rules aggregate into a science. Moreover, there arises the necessity for some discrimination between the nebulous inspiration of a guess, which in our graver moods we call an “idea,” and the comparative certainty of a systematic inference, which those graver moods dignify with the title of a “theory.” As a mere fact, speculations and ideas may be almost as old as the hills: laborious methods can lead to a theory which, new to-day, may be discarded or be confirmed tomorrow in the light of fuller knowledge. Again let me offer a couple of illustrations, more academic than imaginary Russians or a gambling quest for an unearned increment. One shall be from astronomy, the other from the structure of matter or (as the old Latin poet Lucretius styled it) the nature of things. Systematic astronomy had its establishment in observations as accurate as time and patience and simple instruments would allow. A marvellous collection of facts, relating to such abstruse