continue..
in velocity along the wave front during the time of “immersion” in the glass, the direction of the wave itself will be changed. Thus we see that not only the corpuscular theory, but also the wave theory, leads to an explanation of refraction. Further consideration, together with a little mathematics, shows that the wave theory explanation is simpler and better, and that the consequences are in perfect agreement with observation. Indeed, quantitative methods of reasoning enable us to deduce the velocity of light in a refractive medium if we know how the beam refracts when passing into it. Direct measurements splendidly confirm these predictions, and thus also the wave theory of light. There still remains the question of color. It must be remembered that a wave is characterized by two numbers, its velocity and its wave length. The essential assumption of the wave theory of light is that different wave lengths correspond to different colors. The wave length of homogeneous yellow light differs from that of red or violet. Instead of the artificial segregation of corpuscles belonging to various colors we have the natural difference in wave length. It follows that Newton’s experiments on the dispersion of light can be described in two different languages, that of the corpuscular theory and that of the wave theory. For example: Corpuscular Language|Wave Language ---|--- The corpuscles belonging to different colors have the same velocity in vacuo, but different velocities in glass.|The rays of different wave length belonging to different colors have the same velocity in the ether, but different velocities in glass. White light is a composition of corpuscles belonging to different colors, whereas in the spectrum they are separated.|White light is a composition of waves of all wave lengths, whereas in the spectrum they are separated. It would seem wise to avoid the ambiguity resulting from the existence of two distinct theories of the same phenomena, by deciding in favor of one of them after a careful consideration of the faults and merits of each. The dialogue between N and H shows that this is no easy task. The decision at this point would be more a matter of taste than of scientific conviction. In Newton’s time, and for more than a hundred years after, most physicists favored the corpuscular theory. History brought in its verdict, in favor of the wave theory of light and against the corpuscular theory, at a much later date, the middle of the nineteenth century. In his conversation with H, N stated that a decision between the two theories was, in principle, experimentally possible. The corpuscular theory does not allow light to bend, and demands the existence of sharp shadows. According to the wave theory, on the other hand, a sufficiently small obstacle will cast no shadow. In the work of Young and Fresnel this result was experimentally realized and theoretical conclusions were drawn. An extremely simple experiment has already been discussed, in which a screen with a hole was placed in front of a point source of light and a light appeared on the wall. We shall simplify the experiment further by assuming that the source emits homogeneous light. For the best results the source should be a strong one. Let us imagine that the hole in the screen is made smaller and smaller. If we use a strong source and succeed in making the hole small enough, a new and surprising phenomenon appears, something quite incomprehensible from the point of view of the corpuscular theory. There is no longer a sharp distinction between light and dark. Light gradually fades into the dark background in a series of light and dark rings. The appearance of rings is very characteristic of a wave theory. The explanation for alternating light and dark areas will be clear in the case of a somewhat different experimental arrangement. Suppose we have a sheet of dark paper with two pinholes through which light may pass. If the holes are close together and very small, and if the source of homogeneous light is strong enough, many light and dark bands will appear on the wall, gradually fading off at the sides into the dark background. The explanation is simple. A dark band is where a trough of a wave from one pinhole meets the crest of a wave from the other pinhole, so that the two cancel. A band of light is where two troughs or two crests from waves of the different pinholes meet and reinforce each other. The explanation is more complicated in the case of the dark and light rings of our previous example in which we used a screen with one hole, but the principle is the same…. The experiments described here show the diffraction of light, the deviation from the rectilinear propagation when small holes or obstacles are placed in the way of the light wave. With the aid of a little mathematics we are able to go much further. It is possible to find out how great or, rather, how small the wave length must be to produce a particular pattern. Thus the experiments described enable us to measure the wave length of the homogeneous light used as a source. To give an idea of how small the numbers are we shall cite two wave lengths, those representing the extremes of the solar spectrum, that is, the red and the violet. The wave length of red light is 0.00008 cm. The wave length of violet light is 0.00004 cm. We should not be astonished that the numbers are so small. The phenomenon of distinct shadow, that is, the phenomenon of rectilinear propagation of light, is observed in nature only because all apertures and obstacles ordinarily met with are extremely large in comparison with the wave lengths of light. It is only when very small obstacles and apertures are used that light reveals its wave-like nature. But the story of the search for a theory of light is by no means finished. The verdict of the nineteenth century was not final and ultimate. For the modern physicist the entire problem of deciding between corpuscles and waves again exists, this time in a much more profound and intricate form. Let us accept the defeat of the corpuscular theory of light until we recognize the problematic nature of the victory of the wave theory. Longitudinal or Transverse Light Waves? All the optical phenomena we have considered speak for the wave theory. The bending of light around small obstacles and the explanation of refraction are the strongest arguments in its favor. Guided by the mechanical point of view we realize that there is still one question to be answered: the determination of the mechanical properties of the ether. It is essential for the solution of this problem to know whether light waves in the ether are longitudinal or transverse. In other words: is light propagated like sound? Is the wave due to changes in the density of the medium, so that the oscillations of the particles are in the direction of the propagation? Or does the ether resemble an elastic jelly, a medium in which only transverse waves can be set up and whose particles move in a direction perpendicular to that in which the wave itself travels? Before solving this problem let us try to decide which answer should be preferred. Obviously, we should be fortunate if light waves were longitudinal. The difficulties in designing a mechanical ether would be much simpler in this case. Our picture of ether might very probably be something like the mechanical picture of a gas that explains the propagation of sound waves. It would be much more difficult to form a picture of ether carrying transverse waves. To imagine a jelly as a medium made up of particles in such a way that transverse waves are propagated by means of it is no easy task. Huygens believed that the ether would turn out to be “air-like” rather than “jelly-like.” But nature cares very little for our limitations. Was nature, in this case, merciful to the physicists attempting to understand all events from a mechanical point of view? In order to answer this question we must discuss some new experiments. We shall consider in detail only one of many experiments which are able to supply us with an answer. Suppose we have a very thin plate of tourmaline crystal, cut in a particular way which we need not describe here. The crystal plate must be thin so that we are able to see a source of light through it. But now let us take two such plates and place both of them between our eyes and the light. What do we ex- pect to see? Again a point of light, if the plates are sufficiently thin. The chances are very good that the experiment will confirm our expectation. Without worrying about the statement that it may be chance, let us assume we do see the light point through the two crystals. Now let us