continue..
don’t go! Please stay, I beg you, my dear. Perhaps we shall think of something. Lopahin. What is there to think of? Mme. Ranevskaya. Don’t go, I beg you. With you here it’s more cheerful anyway. (Pause.) I keep expecting something to happen, it’s as though the house were going to crash about our ears. Gayev (in deep thought). Bank shot in the corner…Three cushions in the side pocket…. Mme. Ranevskaya. We have been great sinners… Lopahin. What sins could you have committed? Gayev (putting a candy in his mouth). They say I’ve eaten up my fortune in candy! (Laughs.) Mme. Ranevskaya. Oh, my sins! I’ve squandered money away recklessly, like a lunatic, and I married a man who made nothing but debts. My husband drank himself to death on champagne, he was a terrific drinker. And then, to my sorrow, I fell in love with another man, and I lived with him. And just then—that was my first punishment—a blow on the head: my little boy was drowned here in the river. And I went abroad, went away forever…never to come back, never to see this river again…I closed my eyes and ran, out of my mind…. But he followed me, pitiless, brutal. I bought a villa near Mentone, because he fell ill there; and for three years, day and night, I knew no peace, no rest. The sick man wore me out, he sucked my soul dry. Then last year, when the villa was sold to pay my debts, I went to Paris, and there he robbed me, abandoned me, took up with another woman, I tried to poison myself—it was stupid, so shameful—and then suddenly I felt drawn back to Russia, back to my own country, to my little girl. (Wipes her tears away.) Lord, Lord! Be merciful, forgive me my sins—don’t punish me any more! (Takes a telegram out of her pocket.) This came today from Paris—he begs me to forgive him, implores me to go back…(Tears up the tele gram.) Do I hear music? (Listens.) Gayev. That’s our famous Jewish band, you remember? Four violins, a flute, and a double bass. Mme. Ranevskaya. Does it still exist? We ought to send for them some evening and have a party. Lopahin (listens). I don’t hear anything. (Hums softly) “The Germans for a fee will Frenchify a Russian.” (Laughs.) I saw a play at the theater yesterday—awfully funny. Mme. Ranevskaya. There was probably nothing funny about it. You shouldn’t go to see plays, you should look at yourselves more often. How drab your lives are—how full of unnecessary talk. Lopahin. That’s true; come to think of it, we do live like fools. (Pause.) My pop was a peasant, an idiot; he understood nothing, never taught me anything, all he did was beat me when he was drunk, and always with a stick. Fundamentally, I’m just the same kind of blockhead and idiot. I was never taught anything—I have a terrible handwriting, I write so that I feel ashamed before people, like a pig. Mme. Ranevskaya. You should get married, my friend. Lopahin. Yes…that’s true. Mme. Ranevskaya. To our Varya, she’s a good girl. Lopahin. Yes. Mme. Ranevskaya. She’s a girl who comes of simple people, she works all day long; and above all, she loves you. Besides, you’ve liked her for a long time now. Lopahin. Well, I’ve nothing against it. She’s a good girl. (Pause.) Gayev. I’ve been offered a place in the bank—6,000 a year. Have you heard? Mme. Ranevskaya. You’re not up to it. Stay where you are. firs enters, carrying an overcoat . Firs (to gayev). Please put this on, Sir, it’s damp. Gayev (putting it on). I’m fed up with you, Brother. Firs. Never mind. This morning you drove off without saying a word. (Looks him over.) Mme. Ranevskaya. How you’ve aged, Firs. Firs. I beg your pardon? Lopahin. The lady says you’ve aged. Firs. I’ve lived a long time; they were arranging my wedding and your papa wasn’t born yet. (Laughs.) When freedom came I was already head footman. I wouldn’t consent to be set free then; I stayed on with the master…(Pause.) I remember they were all very happy, but why they were happy, they didn’t know themselves. Lopahin. It was fine in the old days! At least there was flogging! Firs (not hearing). Of course. The peasants kept to the masters, the masters kept to the peasants; but now they’ve all gone their own ways, and there’s no making out anything. Gayev. Be quiet, Firs. I must go to town tomorrow. They’ve promised to introduce me to a general who might let us have a loan. Lopahin. Nothing will come of that. You won’t even be able to pay the interest, you can be certain of that. Mme. Ranevskaya. He’s raving, there isn’t any general. (Enter toofimov, anya, and varya.) Gayev. Here come our young people. Anya. There’s Mamma, on the bench. Mme. Ranevskaya (tenderly). Come here, come along, my darlings. (Embraces anya and varya.) If you only knew how I love you both! Sit beside me—there, like that. (All sit down.) Lopahin. Our perpetual student is always with the young ladies. Trofimov. That’s not any of your business. Lopahin. He’ll soon be fifty, and he’s still a student! Trofimov. Stop your silly jokes. Lopahin. What are you so cross about, you queer bird? Trofimov. Oh, leave me alone. Lopahin (laughs). Allow me to ask you, what do you think of me? Trofimov. What I think of you, Yermolay Alexeyevich, is this: you are a rich man who will soon be a millionaire. Well, just as a beast of prey, which devours everything that comes in its way, is necessary for the process of metabolism to go on, so you too are necessary. (All laugh.) Varya. Better tell us something about the planets, Petya. Mme. Ranevskaya. No, let’s go on with yesterday’s conversation. Trofimov. What was it about? Gayev. About man’s pride. Trofimov. Yesterday we talked a long time, but we came to no conclusion. There is something mystical about man’s pride in your sense of the word. Perhaps you’re right, from your own point of view. But if you reason simply, without going into subtleties, then what call is there for pride? Is there any sense in it, if man is so poor a thing physiologically, and if, in the great majority of cases, he is coarse, stupid, and profoundly unhappy? We should stop admiring ourselves. We should work, and that’s all. Gayev. You die, anyway. Trofimov. Who knows? And what does it mean—to die? Perhaps man has a hundred senses, and at his death only the five we know perish, while the other ninety-five remain alive. Mme. Ranevskaya. How clever you are, Petya! Lopahin (ironically). Awfully clever! Trofimov. Mankind goes forward, developing its powers. Everything that is now unattainable for it will one day come within man’s reach and be clear to him; only we must work, helping with all our might those who seek the truth. Here among us in Russia only the very few work as yet. The great majority of the intelligentsia, as far as I can see, seek nothing, do nothing, are totally unfit for work of any kind. They call themselves the intelligentsia, yet they are uncivil to their servants, treat the peasants like animals, are poor students, never read anything serious, do absolutely nothing at all, only talk about science, and have little appreciation of the arts. They are all solemn, have grim faces, they all philosophize and talk of weighty matters. And meanwhile the vast majority of us, ninety-nine out of a hundred, live like savages. At the least provocation—a punch in the jaw, and curses. They eat disgustingly, sleep in filth and stuffiness, bedbugs everywhere, stench and damp and moral slovenliness. And obviously, the only purpose of all our fine talk is to hoodwink ourselves and others. Show me where the public nurseries are that we’ve heard so much about, and the libraries. We read about them in novels, but in reality they don’t exist, there is nothing but dirt, vulgarity, and Asiatic backwardness. I don’t like very solemn faces, I’m afraid of them, I’m afraid of serious conversations. We’d do better to keep quiet for a while. Lopahin. Do you know, I get up at five o’clock in the morning, and I work from morning till night; and I’m always handling money, my own and other people’s, and I see what people around me are really like. You’ve only to start doing anything to see how few honest, decent people there are. Sometimes when I lie awake at night, I think: “Oh, Lord, thou hast given us immense forests, boundless fields, the widest horizons, and living in their midst, we ourselves ought really to be giants.” Mme. Ranevskaya. Now you want giants! They’re only good in fairy tales; otherwise they’re frightening. yepihodov crosses the stage at the rear, playing the guitar . Mme. Ranevskaya (pensively). There goes Yepihodov.