continue..
there? (Locks the side door on the left.) There are some things stored here, better lock up. Let us go! Anya. Good-by, old house! Good-by, old life! Trofimov. Hail to you, new life! Exit with anya . varya looks round the room and goes out slowly . yasha and charlotta with her dog go out . Lopahin. And so, until the spring. Go along, friends…Bye-bye! (Exits.) mme . ranevskaya and gayev remain alone . As though they had been waiting for this, they throw themselves on each other’s necks, and break into subdued, restrained sobs, afraid of being overheard. Gayev (in despair). My sister! My sister! Mme. Ranevskaya. Oh, my orchard—my dear, sweet, beautiful orchard! My life, my youth, my happiness—good-by! Good-by! (Voice of anya, gay and summoning: “Mamma!” Voice of trofimov, gay and excited: “Halloo!”) Mme. Ranevskaya. One last look at the walls, at the windows…Our poor mother loved to walk about this room… Gayev. My sister, my sister! (Voice of anya: “Mamma!” Voice of trofimov: “Halloo!”) Mme. Ranevskaya. We’re coming. They go out. The stage is empty. The sound of doors being locked, of carriages driving away. Then silence. In the stillness is heard the muffled sound of the ax striking a tree, a mournful, lonely sound. Footsteps are heard. firs appears in the doorway on the right . He is dressed as usual in a jacket and white waistcoat and wears slippers. He is ill. Firs (goes to the door, tries the handle). Locked! They’ve gone… (Sits down on the sofa.) They’ve forgotten me…Never mind…I’ll sit here a bit…I’ll wager Leonid Andreyevich hasn’t put his fur coat on, he’s gone off in his light overcoat…(Sighs anx iously.) I didn’t keep an eye on him…Ah, when they’re young, they’re green…(Mumbles something indistinguishable.) Life has gone by as if I had never lived. (Lies down.) I’ll lie down a while…There’s no strength left in you, old fellow; nothing is left, nothing. Ah, you addlehead! (Lies motionless. A distant sound is heard coming from the sky as it were, the sound of a snapping string mourn fully dying away. All is still again, and nothing is heard but the strokes of the ax against a tree far away in the orchard.)