Work: Numerical Laws and the Use of Mathematics in Science Field: numerical laws and the use of mathematics in science Author: Norman Robert Campbell In the previous chapter we concluded that density was a measurable property because there is a fixed numerical relation, asserted by a “numerical law,” between the weight of a substance and its volume. In this chapter we shall examine more closely the idea of a numerical law, and discover how it leads to such exceedingly important developments. Let us first ask exactly what we do when we are trying to discover a numerical law, such as that between weight and volume. We take various portions of a substance, measure their weights and their volumes, and put down the result in two parallel columns in our notebook. Thus I may find these results: Weight|Volume|Weight|Volume ---|---|---|--- 1|7|4|28 2|14|10|70 3|21|29|203 I now try to find some fixed relation between the corresponding numbers in the two columns; and I shall succeed in that attempt if I can find some rule whereby, starting with the number in one column, I can arrive at the corresponding number in the other. If I find such a rule—and if the rule holds good for all the further measurements that I may make—then I have discovered a numerical law. In the example we have taken the rule is easy to find. I have only to divide the numbers in the second column by 7 in order to arrive at those in the first, or multiply those in the first by 7 in order to arrive at those in the second. That is a definite rule which I can always apply whatever the numbers are; it is a rule which might always be true, but need not always be true; whether or no it is true is a matter for experiment to decide. So much is obvious; but now I want to ask a further and important question. How did we ever come to discover this rule; what suggested to us to try division or multiplication by 7: and what is the precise significance of division and multiplication in this connection? The Source of Numerical Relations. The answer to the first part of this question is given by the discussion on p. 213. Division and multiplication are operations of importance in the counting of objects; in such counting the relation between 21, 7, 3 (the third of which results from the division of the first by the second) corresponds to a definite relation between the things counted; it implies that if I divide the 21 objects into 7 groups, each containing the same number of objects, then the number of objects in each of the 7 groups is 3. By examining such relations through the experimental process of counting we arrive at the multiplication (or division) table. This table, when it is completed, states a long series of relations between numerals, each of which corresponds to an experimental fact; the numerals represent physical properties (numbers) and in any given relation (e.g., 7×3=21) each numeral represents a different property. But when we have got the multiplication table, a statement of relations between numerals, we can regard it, and do usually regard it, simply as a statement of relations between numerals; we can think about it without any regard to what those numerals represented when we were drawing up the table. And if any other numerals are presented to our notice, it is possible and legitimate to ask whether these numerals, whatever they may represent, are in fact related as are the numerals in the multiplication table. In particular, when we are seeking a numerical relation between the columns of Table I, we may inquire, and it is natural for us to inquire, whether by means of the multiplication we can find a rule which will enable us to arrive at the numeral in the second column starting from that in the first. That explains why it is so natural to us to try division when we are seeking a relation between numbers. But it does not answer the second part of the question; for in the numerical law that we are considering, the relation between the things represented by the numerals is not that which we have just noticed between things counted. When we say that, by dividing the volume by 7, we can arrive at the weight, we do not mean that the weight is the volume of each of the things at which we arrive by dividing the substance into 7 portions, each having the same volume. For a weight can never be a volume, any more than a soldier can be a number; it can only be represented by the same numeral as a volume, as a soldier can be represented by a numeral which also represents a number. The distinction is rather subtle, but if the reader is to understand what follows, he must grasp it. The relation which we have found between weight and volume is a pure numerical relation; it is suggested by the relation between actual things, namely collections which we count; but it is not that relation. The difference may be expressed again by means of the distinction between numbers and numerals. The relation between actual things counted is a relation between the numbers—which are physical properties—of those things; the relation between weight and volume is a relation between numerals, the numerals that are used to represent those properties. The physical relation in the second case is not between numbers at all, but between weight and volume which are properties quite different from numbers; it appears very similar to that between numbers only because we use numerals, originally invented to represent numbers, to represent other properties. The relation stated by a numerical law is a relation between numerals, and only between numerals, though the idea that there may be such a relation has been suggested to us by the study of the physical property, number. If we understand this, we shall see what a very remarkable thing it is that there should be numerical laws at all, and shall see why the idea of such a law arose comparatively late in the history of science. For even when we know the relations between numbers, there is no reason to believe that there must be any relations of the same kind between the numerals which are used to represent, not only numbers, but also other properties. Until we actually tried, there was no reason to think that it must be possible to find at all numerical laws, stating numerical relations such as those of division and multiplication. The fact that there are such relations is a new fact, and ought to be surprising. As has been said so often, it does frequently turn out that suggestions made simply by our habits of mind are actually true; and it is because they are so often true that science is interesting. But every time they are true there is reason for wonder and astonishment. And there is a further consequence yet more deserving of our attention at present. If we realize that the numerical relations in numerical laws, though suggested by relations between numbers, are not those relations, we shall be prepared to find also numerical relations which are not even suggested by relations between numbers, but only by relations between numerals. Let me take an example. Consider the pairs of numerals (1, 1), (2, 4), (3, 9), (4, 16)… Our present familiarity with numerals enables us to see at once what is the relation between each pair; it is that the second numeral of the pair is arrived at by multiplying the first numeral by itself; 1 is equal to 1×1, 4 to 2×2, 9 to 3×3; and so on. But, if the reader will consider the matter, he will see that the multiplication of a number (the physical property of an object) by itself does not correspond to any simple relation between the things counted; by the mere examination of counted objects, we should never be led to consider such an operation at all. It is suggested to us only because we have drawn up our multiplication table and have reached the idea of multiplying one numeral by another, irrespective of what is represented by that numeral. We know what is the result of multiplying 3×3, when the two 3’s represent different numbers and the multiplication corresponds to a physical operation on things counted; it occurs to us that the multiplication of 3 by itself, when the two 3’s represent the same thing, although it does not correspond to a physical relation, may yet correspond to the numerical relation in a numerical law. And we find once more that this suggestion turns out to be true; there are numerical laws in which this numerical relation is found. Thus if we measure (1) the time during which a body starting from rest has been falling (2) the distance through which it