continue..
was concerned with the constant rate of speed round the sun, as measured by the area swept out by an imagined line drawn from the sun to the planet, thus giving one sort of measure. The other law was concerned with a relation between the size of the oval described by the planet round the sun, and the time which the planet required to effect one complete revolution round the sun: thus giving a second sort of measure. Knowledge had passed out of the describing stage into the measuring stage. The genius of Newton comes upon the scene. According to the chronicles in summary, he saw an apple fall: it made him think of the moon; and thought led him to the theory of universal gravitation. Perhaps the sequence of ideas, a falling apple, a steady moon, and an abstract theory, does not seem very coherent; and it sounds like an extract from Alice in Wonderland to be told that the abstract theory can account for the fall of the apple and the steadiness of the moon. Yet it is true, and the explanation comes in this wise. The Galilei stone and the Newton apple both fall straight down, that is, to the centre of the earth, supposed to be a globe: that qualitative result happens wherever the fall takes place; it is reasonable to suppose that the fall is due to the earth. There had been another discovery of Galilei’s which, at first, had shocked even intellectual belief: stones of different weights and kinds and sizes fall through the same height in the same time; and so it is reasonable to suppose that, in the fall of a stone, the earth is the principal agent, perhaps the only agent, that leads to the fall of any stone anywhere through any height. It is true that the distances which can actually be observed for falling stones are ludicrously small compared with the size of the earth; and the crucial number seems to be a lonely fact, unrelated to anything except a falling stone, unexplained, so far inexplicable. But everything connected with the observation and with the calculations remains unaffected if a hypothesis be propounded under which the earth attracts the stone and is the sole cause of its fall: and there is no other observation, reserved in a background, to render that hypothesis open to objection. Next, the moon goes round the earth steadily: so far as that movement is concerned, the moon can be declared (always descriptively, and with sufficient accuracy) to move round the earth in a circle with a steady speed. But the stone falls straight to the earth, always with an increasing speed; the moon moves round the earth, always with a steady speed; what earthly connection can there be between the two movements? It is here that the hypothetical attracting faculty of the earth enters, through another discovery which had been made by Galilei and formulated precisely by Newton. Under this law a movable body, if subjected to no influence of any kind, and if it moves at all, will only move in a straight line, and only at an unchanging speed in that line; and variation from the straightness of path, or variation of speed even in a straight path, can be effected only by outside influence. Our falling stone moves in a straight path downwards, but with an ever-gathering speed; this change of speed is due to some influence: all falling stones make in a direction towards the very centre of the earth; can the influence, affecting the speed, be due to the earth attracting the stone down to itself? Our moon does not move in a straight line; the deviation from straightness must be due to some influence; we must, for the moment, leave the uniform speed out of count, for the law makes no declaration concerning uniform speed not along a straight line. Can this influence upon the moon be due to the earth for ever attracting the moon out of the straight line which would be an uninfluenced path, drawing the moon to itself, with just enough influence to keep it at a steadily unchanging distance from itself? On the hypothesis of an attracting quality in the earth, the said quality must explain the deviation of the moon from a straight path, while it can explain the changing speed of the falling stone. The hypothesis must be tested; it is not to be declared true because it has not been disproved. Critical tests are ready in the observed facts and in the inferences from the facts. But how are the facts to be used? Simply and solely by the application of mathematics, never constructed in this direction by any man before Newton, now the possession of any reasonably capable mathematical undergraduate. Remember that we have the crucial number, sixteen, for Galilei’s falling stone: let us now pay some attention to the moon. As the moon moves steadily in a circle round the earth, in a period of 29 1/2 days roughly, and as the distance of the moon from the earth otherwise is known to be approximately sixty times the radius of the earth, the steady speed of the moon in her circle is easily calculated: the inferred estimate will, of course, be based upon the estimated size of the radius of the earth. An entirely different calculation gives our estimate of the pull to be exercised upon the moon, to drag her regularly and always into the circle away from the straight line which would be her path if there were no influence. Had there been no influence she would have gone along a straight line, for ever moving away from the earth farther and farther: as things are, she remains at a steady distance that on the average remains unchanged. Consequently the difference, say at the end of one second, between her actual distance from the earth and what would have been her distance had she moved along a straight line, is the distance through which, during that second, the supposed effective influence would have pulled her. That distance is a measure of the influence: but how is the influence to be estimated? The estimate manifestly cannot come in the same way as for the falling stone. For the stone, only a few hundred feet at the utmost came to account. The moon is 240,000 miles away from the earth and remains at that distance. An assumption that the measure of the attracting influence of the earth is the same for all stones falling upon its surface causes no mental hesitation: the few hundred feet, which are the utmost traversed by a stone, are such a triviality in magnitude compared with the four-thousand-mile radius of the earth that there is no real opportunity for modification of the influence of the earth. But what is to be the assumption made for an attracted moon, if it is attracted? In thought we have to go far to reach the moon: we may as well be bold, go out boldly in thought into the vast space of the solar system, and use the knowledge provided by the Kepler laws which, be it noted, are not hypotheses but are the systematic expression of observed facts. An easy mathematical calculation indicates the character of the supposed terrestrial influence which does no more than keep the moon going round in a circle at an unchanging distance, but does not bring the moon any nearer as it brings a stone nearer. This calculation uses the Kepler law establishing the relation between the size of a planetary path and the time of revolution along the whole path, and the result of the calculation is to show that the attracting influence of the earth, if it is to be the controlling cause of the movement, must decrease as the square of the number which represents the distance of the attracted body from the centre of the earth. The distance of the moon from the earth is, roughly, sixty times the radius of the earth; and the square of the number 60 is 3,600. Therefore, according to the result of the calculation, the attracting influence of the earth at the distant moon is only one 3,600th part of its attracting influence upon a stone falling at its surface. Now we know that the earth’s influence is the same for all falling stones and, ultimately, is measured by the crucial number sixteen. We want to know whether the earth’s attracting influence, if any, upon the moon can be the same in kind as upon the falling stone, while, of course, its magnitude will be diminished in proper proportion owing to the difference in distance. Let us denote the crucial number, connected solely with the attracting power of the earth, by the symbol x, so dear to mathematicians. For a falling stone at the surface of the earth this number x is known to be sixteen. If our hypothesis, that