continue..
helps us in two ways. First, since it states that it is possible to make a standard series of collections one of which will have the same number as any other collection, it suggests that it might be well to count collections, not against each other, but against a standard series of collections. If we could carry this standard series about with us, we could always ascertain whether any one collection had the same number as any other by observing whether the member of the standard series which had the same number as the first had also the same number as the second. Next, it shows us how to make such a standard series with the least possible cumbrousness. If we had to have a totally different collection for each member of the standard series, the whole series would be impossibly cumbrous; but our rule shows that the earlier members of the series (that is those with the smaller number) may be all parts of the later members. Suppose we have a collection of objects, each distinguishable from each other, and agree to take one of these objects as the first member of the series; this object together with some other as the next member; these objects with yet another as the next member; and so on. Then we shall obtain, according to our rule, a series, some member of which has the same number as any other collection we want to count, and yet the number of objects, in all the members of the standard series taken together, will not be greater than that of the largest collection we want to count. And, of course, this is the process actually adopted. For the successive members of the standard series compounded in this way, primitive man chose, as portable, distinguishable objects, his fingers and toes. Civilized man invented numerals for the same purpose. Numerals are simply distinguishable objects out of which we build our standard series of collections by adding them in turn to previous members of the series. The first member of our standard series is 1, the next 1, 2, the next 1, 2, 3 and so on. We count other collections against these members of the standard series and so ascertain whether or no two collections so counted have the same number. By an ingenious convention we describe which member of the series has the same number as a collection counted against it by quoting simply the last numeral in that member; we describe the fact that the collection of the days of the week has the same number as the collection 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, by saying “that the number” of the days of the week is 7. But when we say that what we really mean, and what is really important, is that this collection has the same number as the collection of numerals (taken in the standard order) which ends in 7 and the same number as any other collection which also has the same number as the collection of numerals which ends in 7. The two rules that have been mentioned are necessary to explain what we mean by “the number” of a collection and how we ascertain that number. There is a third rule which is of great importance in the use of numbers. We often want to know what is the number of a collection which is formed by combining two other collections of which the numbers are known, or, as it is usually called, adding the two collections. For instance we may ask what is the number of the collection made by adding a collection of 2 objects to a collection of 3 objects. We all know the answer, 5. It can be found by arguing thus: The first collection can be counted against the numerals 1, 2; the second against the numerals 1, 2, 3. But the numerals 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, a collection formed by adding the two first collections, can be counted against 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Therefore the number of the combined collection is 5. However, a little examination will show that in reaching this conclusion we have made use of another rule, namely that if two collections A and a, have the same number, and two other collections B and b, have the same number, then the collection formed by adding A to B has the same number as that formed by adding a to b; in other words, equals added to equals produce equal sums. This is a third rule about numbers and counting; it is quite as important as the other two rules; all three are so obvious to us to-day that we never think about them, but they must have been definitely discovered at some time in the history of mankind, and without them all, our habitual use of numbers would be impossible. What Properties Are Measurable? And now, after this discussion of number, we can return to the other measurable properties of objects which, like number, can be represented by numerals. We can now say more definitely what is the characteristic of these properties which makes them measurable. It is that there are rules true of these properties, closely analogous to the rules on which the use of number depends. If a property is to be measurable it must be such that (1) two objects which are the same in respect of that property as some third object are the same as each other; (2) by adding objects successively we must be able to make a standard series one member of which will be the same in respect of the property as any other object we want to measure; (3) equals added to equals produce equal sums. In order to make a property measurable we must find some method of judging equality and of adding objects, such that these rules are true. Let me explain what is meant by using as an example the measurable property, weight. Weight is measured by the balance. Two bodies are judged to have the same weight if, when they are placed in opposite pans, neither tends to sink; and two bodies are added in respect of weight when they are both placed on the same pan of the balance. With these definitions of equality and addition, it is found that the three rules are obeyed. (1) If the body A balances the body B, and B balances C, then A balances C. (2) By placing a body in one pan and continually adding it to others, collections can be built up which will balance any other body placed in the other pan. (3) If the body A balances the body B, and C balances D, then A and C in the same pan will balance B and D in the other pan. To make the matter yet clearer let us take another measurable property, length. Two straight rods are judged equal in length, if they can be placed so that both ends of one are contiguous to both ends of the other; they are added in respect of length, when they are placed with one end of one contiguous with one end of the other, while the two form a single straight rod. Here again we find the three rules fulfilled. Bodies which are equal in length to the same body are equal in length to each other. By adding successively rods to each other, a rod can be built up which is equal to any other rod. And equal rods added to equal rods produce equal rods. Length is therefore a measurable property. It is because these rules are true that measurement of these properties is useful and possible; it is these rules that make the measurable properties so similar to numbers, that it is possible and useful to represent them by numerals the primary purpose of which is to represent numbers. It is because of them that it is possible to find one, and only one numeral, which will fitly represent each property; and it is because of them, that these numerals, when they are found, tell us something useful about the properties. One such use arises in the combination of bodies possessing the properties. We may want to know how the property varies when bodies possessing it are added in the way characteristic of measurement. When we have assigned numerals to represent the property we shall know that the body with the property 2 added to that with the property 3 will have the same property as that with the property 5, or as the combination of the bodies with properties 4 and 1. This is not the place to examine exactly how these conclusions are shown to be universally valid; but they are valid only because the three rules are true. The Laws of Measurement. But what is the nature of these rules? They are laws established by definite experiment. The word “rule” has been used