continue..
and then measured the radioactivity of each of the bodies thus obtained. By successive eliminations they saw the “abnormal” radioactivity take refuge in certain parts of the ore. As they went on, the field of investigation was narrowed. It was exactly the technique used by the police when they search the houses of a neighborhood, one by one, to isolate and arrest a malefactor. But there was more than one malefactor here: the radioactivity was concentrated principally in two different chemical fractions of the pitchblende. For M. and Mme Curie it indicated the existence of two new elements instead of one. By July, 1898, they were able to announce the discovery of one of these substances with certainty. “You will have to name it,” Pierre said to his young wife, in the same tone as if it were a question of choosing a name for little Irène. The one-time Mlle Sklodovska reflected in silence for a moment. Then, her heart turning toward her own country which had been erased from the map of the world, she wondered vaguely if the scientific event would be published in Russia, Germany and Austria—the oppressor countries—and answered timidly: “Could we call it ‘polonium’?” In the Proceedings of the Academy for July, 1898, we read: We believe the substance we have extracted from pitchblende contains a metal not yet observed, related to bismuth by its analytical properties. If the existence of this new metal is confirmed we propose to call it polonium, from the name of the original country of one of us. The choice of this name proves that in becoming a Frenchwoman and a physicist Marie had not disowned her former enthusiasms. Another thing proves it for us: even before the note “On a New Radioactive Substance Contained in Pitchblende” had appeared in the Proceedings of the Academy, Marie had sent the manuscript to her native country, to that Joseph Boguski who directed the little laboratory at the Museum of Industry and Agriculture where she had made her first experiments. The communication was published in Warsaw in a monthly photographic review called Swiatlo almost as soon as in Paris. Life was unchanged in the little flat in the Rue de la Glacière. Marie and Pierre worked even more than usual; that was all. When the heat of summer came, the young wife found time to buy some baskets of fruit in the markets and, as usual, she cooked and put away preserves for the winter, according to the recipes used in the Curie family. Then she locked the shutters on her windows, which gave on burned leaves; she registered their two bicycles at the Orleans station, and, like thousands of other young women in Paris, went off on holiday with her husband and her child. This year the couple had rented a peasant’s house at Auroux, in Auvergne. Happy to breathe good air after the noxious atmosphere of the Rue Lhomond, the Curies made excursions to Mende, Puy, Clermont, Mont-Dore. They climbed hills, visited grottoes, bathed in rivers. Every day, alone in the country, they spoke of what they called their “new metals,” polonium and “the other”—the one that remained to be found. In September they would go back to the damp workroom and the dull minerals; with freshened ardor they would take up their search again…. One grief interfered with Marie’s intoxication for work: the Dluskis were on the point of leaving Paris. They had decided to settle in Austrian Poland and to build a sanatorium for tubercular sufferers at Zakopane in the Carpathian Mountains. The day of separation arrived: Marie and Bronya exchanged brokenhearted farewells; Marie was losing her friend and protector, and for the first time she had the feeling of exile. Letter ```Marie to Bronya, December 2, 1898; You can’t imagine what a hole you have made in my life. With you two, I have lost everything I clung to in Paris except my husband and child. It seems to me that Paris no longer exists, aside from our lodging and the school where we work. Ask Mme Dluska if the green plant you left behind should be watered, and how many times a day. Does it need a great deal of heat and sun? We are well, in spite of the bad weather, the rain and the mud. Irène is getting to be a big girl. She is very difficult about her food, and aside from milk tapioca she will eat hardly anything regularly, not even eggs. Write me what would be a suitable menu for persons of her age….``` In spite of their prosaic character—or perhaps because of it—some notes written by Mme Curie in that memorable year 1898 seem to us worth quoting. Some are to be found in the margins of a book called Family Cooking, with respect to a recipe for gooseberry jelly: I took eight pounds of fruit and the same weight in crystallized sugar. After an ebullition of ten minutes, I passed the mixture through a rather fine sieve. I obtained fourteen pots of very good jelly, not transparent, which “took” perfectly. In a school notebook covered with gray linen, in which the young mother had written little Irène’s weight day by day, her diet and the appearance of her first teeth, we read under the date of July 20, 1898, some days after the publication of the discovery of polonium: Irène says “thanks” with her hand. She can walk very well now on all fours. She says “Gogli, gogli, go.” She stays in the garden all day at Sceaux on a carpet. She can roll, pick herself up, and sit down. On August 15, at Auroux: Irène has cut her seventh tooth, on the lower left. She can stand for half a minute alone. For the past three days we have bathed her in the river. She cries, but today (fourth bath) she stopped crying and played with her hands in the water. She plays with the cat and chases him with war cries. She is not afraid of strangers any more. She sings a great deal. She gets up on the table when she is in her chair. Three months later, on October 17, Marie noted with pride: Irène can walk very well, and no longer goes on all fours. On January 5, 1899: Irène has fifteen teeth! Between these two notes—that of October 17, 1898, in which Irène no longer goes on all fours, and that of January 5 in which Irène has fifteen teeth—and a few months after the note on the gooseberry preserve, we find another note worthy of remark. It was drawn up by Marie and Pierre Curie and a collaborator called G.Bémont. Intended for the Academy of Science, and published in the Proceedings of the session of December 26, 1898, it announced the existence of a second new chemical element in pitchblende. Some lines of this communication read as follows: The various reasons we have just enumerated lead us to believe that the new radioactive substance contains a new element to which we pro pose to give the name of RADIUM. The new radioactive substance certainly contains a very strong pro portion of barium; in spite of that its radioactivity is considerable. The radioactivity of radium therefore must be enormous. The foregoing consists of Chapter XII of Eve Curie’s madame curie .