continue..
hitherto, because it is not quite certain whether they are truly laws in their application to number; but they certainly are laws in their application to other measurable properties, such as weight or length. The fact that the rules are true can be, and must be, determined by experiment in the same way as the fact that any other laws are true. Perhaps it may have appeared to the reader that the rules must be true; that it requires no experiment to determine that bodies which balance the same body will balance each other; and that it is inconceivable that this rule should not be true. But I think he will change his opinion if it is pointed out that the rule is actually true only in certain conditions; for instance, it is only true if the balance is a good one, and has arms of equal length and pans of equal weight. If the arms were unequal, the rule would not be found to be true unless it were carefully prescribed in which pan the bodies were placed during the judgment of equality. Again, the rules would not be true of the property length, unless the rods were straight and were rigid. In implying that the balance is good, and the rods straight and rigid, we have implied definite laws which must be true if the properties are to be measurable, namely that it is possible to make a perfect balance, and that there are rods which are straight and rigid. These are experimental laws; they could not be known apart from definite experiment and observation of the external world; they are not self-evident. Accordingly the process of discovering that a property is measurable in the way that has been described, and setting up a process for measuring it, is one that rests entirely upon experimental inquiry. It is a part, and a most important part, of experimental science. Whenever a new branch of physics is opened up (for, as has been said, physics is the science that deals with such processes of measurement), the first step is always to find some process for measuring the new properties that are investigated; and it is not until this problem has been solved, that any great progress can be made along the branch. Its solution demands the discovery of new laws. We can actually trace the development of new measurable properties in this way in the history of science. Before the dawn of definite history, laws had been discovered which made measurable some of the properties employed by modern science. History practically begins with the Greeks, but before their time the properties, weight, length, volume, and area had been found to be measurable; the establishment of the necessary laws had probably occurred in the great period of Babylonian and Egyptian civilization. The Greeks, largely in the person of Archimedes, found how to measure force by establishing the laws of the lever, and other mechanical systems. Again from the earliest era, there have been rough methods of measuring periods of time, but a true method, really obeying the three rules, was not discovered till the seventeenth century; it arose out of Galileo’s laws of the pendulum. Modern science has added greatly to the list of measurable properties; the science of electricity is based on the discovery, by Cavendish and Coulomb, of the law necessary to measure an electric charge; on the laws, discovered by Öersted and Ampère, necessary to measure an electric current; and on the laws, discovered by Ohm and Kirchhoff, necessary to measure electrical resistance. And the discovery of similar laws has made possible the development of other branches of physics. But, it may be asked, has there ever been a failure to discover the necessary laws? The answer is that there are certainly many properties which are not measurable in the sense that we have been discussing; there are more properties, definitely recognized by science, that are not so measurable than are so measurable. But, as will appear presently, the very nature of these properties makes it impossible that they should be measured in this way. For the only properties to which this kind of measurement seems conceivably applicable, are those which fulfil the condition stated provisionally on p. 205; they must be such that the combina tion of objects possessing the property increases that property. For this is the fundamental significance of the property number; it is something that is increased by addition; any property which does not agree with number in this matter cannot be very closely related to number and cannot possibly be measured by the scheme that has been described. But it will be seen that fulfilment of this condition only makes rule (2) true; it is at least conceivable that a property might obey rule (2) and not rules (1) and (3). Does that ever happen, or can we always find methods of addition and of judging equality such that, if rule (2) is true, the laws are such that rules (1) and (3) are also true? In the vast majority of cases we can find such methods and such laws; and it is a very remarkable fact that we can; it is only one more instance of the way in which nature kindly falls in with our ideas of what ought to be. But I think there is one case in which the necessary methods and laws have not yet been found and are not likely to be found. It is a very difficult matter concerning which even expert physicists might differ, and so no discussion of it can be entered on here. But it is mentioned in order to impress the reader with the fact that measurement does depend upon experimental laws; that it does depend upon the facts of the external world; and that it is not wholly within our power to determine whether we will or will not measure a certain property. That is the feature of measurement which it is really important to grasp for a proper understanding of science. Multiplication. Before we pass to another kind of measurement reference must be made to a matter which space does not allow to be discussed completely. In stating the rules that were necessary in order that weight should be measurable (p. 209), it was said that a collection having the same weight as any given body could be made by adding other bodies to that first selected. Now this statement is not strictly true; it is only true if the body first selected has a smaller weight than any other body it is desired to weigh; and even if this condition is fulfilled, it is not true if the bodies added successively to the collection are of the same weight as that first selected. Thus if my first body weighs 1 lb., I cannot by adding to it make a collection which weighs less than 1 lb., and by adding bodies which each weigh 1 lb., I cannot make a collection which has the same weight as a body weighing (say) 2 1/2 lb. These facts, to which there is no true analogy in connection with number, force us to recognize “fractions.” A considerable complication is thereby introduced, and the reader must accept my assurance that they can all be solved by simple developments of the process of measurement that has been sketched. But for a future purpose it is necessary to notice very briefly the processes of the multiplication and division of magnitudes on which the significance of fractions depends. Suppose I have a collection of bodies, each of which has the same weight 3, the number of bodies in the collection being 4. I may ask what is the weight of the whole collection. The answer is given of course by multiplying 3 by 4, and we all know now that the result of that operation is 12. That fact, and all the other facts summed up in the multiplication table which we learn at school, can be proved from the rules on which weighing depend together with facts determined by counting numerals. But the point I want to make is that multiplication represents a definite experimental operation, namely the combination into a single collection, placed on one pan of the balance, of a set of bodies, all of the same weight, the number of those bodies being known. Division arises directly out of multiplication. In place of asking what will be the weight of a collection formed of a given number of bodies all of the same weight, we ask what must be the weight of each of a collection of bodies, having a given number, when the whole collection has a given weight. E.g., what must each body weigh in order that the whole collection of 4 bodies weighs 12? The answer is obtained by dividing 12 by 4. That answer is obtained, partly from the multiplication table, partly by inventing new numerals which we call