continue..
must be sold, then sell me with the orchard. (Embraces trofimov, kisses him on the forehead.) My son was drowned here. (Weeps.) Pity me, you good, kind fellow! Trofimov. You know, I feel for you with all my heart. Mme. Ranevskaya. But that should have been said differently, so differently! (Takes out her handkerchief—a telegram falls on the floor.) My heart is so heavy today—you can’t imagine! The noise here upsets me—my inmost being trembles at every sound—I’m shaking all over. But I can’t go into my own room; I’m afraid to be alone. Don’t condemn me, Petya…. I love you as though you were one of us, I would gladly let you marry Anya—I swear I would—only, my dear boy, you must study—you must take your degree—you do nothing, you let yourself be tossed by Fate from place to place—it’s so strange. It’s true, isn’t it? And you should do something about your beard, to make it grow somehow! (Laughs.) You’re so funny! Trofimov (picks up the telegram). I’ve no wish to be a dandy. Mme. Ranevskaya. That’s a telegram from Paris. I get one every day. One yesterday and one today. That savage is ill again—he’s in trouble again. He begs forgiveness, implores me to go to him, and really I ought to go to Paris to be near him. Your face is stern, Petya; but what is there to do, my dear boy? What am I to do? He’s ill, he’s alone and unhappy, and who is to look after him, who is to keep him from doing the wrong thing, who is to give him his medicine on time? And why hide it or keep still about it—I love him! That’s clear. I love him, love him! He’s a millstone round my neck, he’ll drag me to the bottom, but I love that stone, I can’t live without it. (Presses trofimov’s hand.) Don’t think badly of me, Petya, and don’t say anything, don’t say… Trofimov (through tears). Forgive me my frankness in heaven’s name; but, you know, he robbed you! Mme. Ranevskaya. No, no, no, you mustn’t say such things! (Covers her ears.) Trofimov. But he’s a scoundrel! You’re the only one who doesn’t know it. He’s a petty scoundrel—a nonentity! Mme. Ranevskaya (controlling her anger). You are twenty-six or twenty-seven years old, but you’re still a schoolboy. Trofimov. That may be. Mme. Ranevskaya. You should be a man at your age. You should understand people who love—and ought to be in love yourself. You ought to fall in love! (Angrily.) Yes, yes! And it’s not purity in you, it’s prudishness, you’re simply a queer fish, a comical freak! Trofimov (horrified). What is she saying? Mme. Ranevskaya. “I am above love!” You’re not above love, but simply, as our Firs says, you’re an addlehead. At your age not to have a mistress! Trofimov (horrified). This is frightful! What is she saying! (Goes rapidly into the ballroom, clutching his head.) It’s frightful—I can’t stand it, I won’t stay! (Exits, but returns at once.) All is over between us! (Exits into anteroom.) Mme. Ranevskaya (shouts after him). Petya! Wait! You absurd fellow, I was joking. Petya! Sound of somebody running quickly downstairs and suddenly falling down with a crash. anya and varya scream . Sound of laughter a moment later. Mme. Ranevskaya. What’s happened? anya runs in . Anya (laughing). Petya’s fallen downstairs! (Runs out.) Mme. Ranevskaya. What a queer bird that Petya is! stationmaster , standing in the middle of the ballroom, recites Alexey Tolstoy’s “Magdalene” to which all listen, but after a few lines, the sound of a waltz is heard from the anteroom and the read ing breaks off . All dance. trofimov , anya , varya , and mme . ranevskaya enter from the anteroom . Mme. Ranevskaya. Petya, you pure soul, please forgive me…. Let’s dance. Dances with petya . anya and varya dance . firs enters, puts his stick down by the side door . yasha enters from the drawing room and watches the dancers . Yasha. Well, grandfather? Firs. I’m not feeling well. In the old days it was generals, barons, and admirals that were dancing at our balls, and now we have to send for the Post Office clerk and the Stationmaster, and even they aren’t too glad to come. I feel kind of shaky. The old master that’s gone, their grandfather, dosed everyone with sealing wax, whatever ailed ’em. I’ve been taking sealing wax every day for twenty years or more. Perhaps that’s what’s kept me alive. Yasha. I’m fed up with you, Grandpop. (Yawns.) It’s time you croaked. Firs. Oh, you addlehead! (Mumbles.) trofimov and mme . ranevskaya dance from the ballroom into the drawing room . Mme. Ranevskaya. Merci. I’ll sit down a while. (Sits down.) I’m tired. Enter anya. Anya (excitedly). There was a man in the kitchen just now who said the cherry orchard was sold today. Mme. Ranevskaya. Sold to whom? Anya. He didn’t say. He’s gone. (Dances off with trofimov.) Yasha. It was some old man gabbing, a stranger. Firs. And Leonid Andreyevich isn’t back yet, he hasn’t come. And he’s wearing his lightweight between-season overcoat; like enough, he’ll catch cold. Ah, when they’re young they’re green. Mme. Ranevskaya. This is killing me. Go, Yasha, find out to whom it has been sold. Yasha. But the old man left long ago. (Laughs.) Mme. Ranevskaya. What are you laughing at? What are you pleased about? Yasha. That Yepihodov is such a funny one. A funny fellow, Two-and-Twenty Troubles! Mme. Ranevskaya. Firs, if the estate is sold, where will you go? Firs. I’ll go where you tell me. Mme. Ranevskaya. Why do you look like that? Are you ill? You ought to go to bed. Firs. Yes! (With a snigger.) Me go to bed, and who’s to hand things round? Who’s to see to things? I’m the only one in the whole house. Yasha (to mme. ranevskaya). Lubov Andreyevna, allow me to ask a favor of you, be so kind! If you go back to Paris, take me with you, I beg you. It’s positively impossible for me to stay here. (Looking around; sotto voce.) What’s the use of talking? You see for yourself, it’s an uncivilized country, the people have no morals, and then the boredom! The food in the kitchen’s revolting, and besides there’s this Firs wanders about mumbling all sorts of inappropriate words. Take me with you, be so kind! Enter pishchik . Pishchik. May I have the pleasure of a waltz with you, charming lady? (mme. ranevskaya accepts.) All the same, enchanting lady, you must let me have 180 rubles…. You must let me have (dancing) just one hundred and eighty rubles. (They pass into the ballroom.) Yasha (hums softly). “Oh, wilt thou understand the tumult in my soul?” In the ballroom a figure in a gray top hat and checked trousers is jumping about and waving its arms; shouts: “Bravo, Charlotta Ivanovna!” Dunyasha (stopping to powder her face; to firs). The young Miss has ordered me to dance. There are so many gentlemen and not enough ladies. But dancing makes me dizzy, my heart begins to beat fast, Firs Nikolayevich. The Post Office clerk said something to me just now that quite took my breath away. (Music stops.) Firs. What did he say? Dunyasha. “You’re like a flower,” he said. Yasha (yawns). What ignorance. (Exits.) Dunyasha. “Like a flower!” I’m such a delicate girl. I simply adore pretty speeches. Firs. You’ll come to a bad end. Enter yepihodov . Yepihodov (to dunyasha). You have no wish to see me, Avdotya Fyodorovna…as though I was some sort of insect. (Sighs.) Ah, life! Dunyasha. What is it you want? Yepihodov. Indubitably you may be right. (Sighs.) But of course, if one looks at it from the point of view, if I may be allowed to say so, and apologizing for my frankness, you have completely reduced me to a state of mind. I know my fate. Every day some calamity befalls me, and I grew used to it long ago, so that I look upon my fate with a smile. You gave me your word, and though I— Dunyasha. Let’s talk about it later, please. But just now leave me alone, I am daydreaming. (Plays with a fan.) Yepihodov. A misfortune befalls me every day; and if I may be allowed to say so, I merely smile, I even laugh. Enter varya . Varya (to yepihodov). Are you still here? What an impertinent fellow you are really! Run along, Dunyasha. (To yepihodov.) Either you’re playing billiards and breaking a cue, or you’re wandering about the drawing room as though you were a guest. Yepihodov. You cannot, permit me to remark, penalize me. Varya. I’m not penalizing you; I’m just telling you. You merely wander from place to place, and don’t do your work. We keep you as a clerk, but Heaven knows what for. Yepihodov (offended). Whether I work or whether I