Work: Charter of the United Nations Field: charter of the united nations Author: Great Documents Title: THE SECURITY COUNCIL Title: Composition Title: ARTICLE 23 1. The Security Council shall consist of eleven Members of the United Nations. The Republic of China, France, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America shall be permanent Members of the Security Council. The General Assembly shall elect six other Members of the United Nations to be nonpermanent Members of the Security Council, due regard being specially paid, in the first instance to the contribution of Members of the United Nations to the maintenance of international peace and security and to the other purposes of the Organization, and also to equitable geographical distribution. 2. The nonpermanent Members of the Security Council shall be elected for a term of two years. In the first election of the nonpermanent Members, however, three shall be chosen for a term of one year. A retiring Member shall not be eligible for immediate re-election. 3. Each Member of the Security Council shall have one representative. Title: Functions and Powers Title: ARTICLE 24 1. In order to ensure prompt and effective action by the United Nations, its Members confer on the Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and agree that in carrying out its duties under this responsibility the Security Council acts on their behalf. 2. In discharging these duties the Security Council shall act in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations. The specific powers granted to the Security Council for the discharge of these duties are laid down in Chapters vi, vii, viii, and xii. 3. The Security Council shall submit annual and, when necessary, special reports to the General Assembly for its consideration. Title: ARTICLE 25 The Members of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council in accordance with the present Charter. Title: ARTICLE 26 In order to promote the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion for armaments of the world’s human and economic resources, the Security Council shall be responsible for formulating, with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee referred to in Article 47, plans to be submitted to the Members of the United Nations for the establishment of a system for the regulation of armaments. Title: Voting Title: ARTICLE 27 1. Each Member of the Security Council shall have one vote. 2. Decisions of the Security Council on procedural matters shall be made by an affirmative vote of seven Members. 3. Decisions of the Security Council on all other matters shall be made by an affirmative vote of seven Members including the concurring votes of the permanent Members; provided that, in decisions under Chapter VI, and under paragraph 3 of Article 52, a party to a dispute shall abstain from voting. Title: Procedure Title: ARTICLE 28 1. The Security Council shall be so organized as to be able to function continuously. Each Member of the Security Council shall for this purpose be represented at all times at the seat of the Organization. 2. The Security Council shall hold periodic meetings at which each of its Members may, if it so desires, be represented by a member of the government or by some other specially designated representative. 3. The Security Council may hold meetings at such places other than the seat of the Organization as in its judgment will best facilitate its work. Title: ARTICLE 29 The Security Council may establish such subsidiary organs as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions. Title: ARTICLE 30 The Security Council shall adopt its own rules of procedure, including the method of selecting its President. Title: ARTICLE 31 Any Member of the United Nations which is not a Member of the Security Council may participate, without vote, in the discussion of any question brought before the Security Council whenever the latter considers that the interests of that Member are specially affected. Title: ARTICLE 32 Any Member of the United Nations which is not a Member of the Security Council or any state which is not a Member of the United Nations, if it is a party to a dispute under consideration by the Security Council, shall be invited to participate, without vote, in the discussion relating to the dispute. The Security Council shall lay down such conditions as it deems just for the participation of a state which is not a Member of the United Nations.