continue..
enables us to distinguish easily and minutely between different but similar properties. It enables us to distinguish between the density of lead and iron far more simply and accurately than we could do by saying that lead is rather denser than iron, but not nearly so dense as gold—and so on. But for that purpose the “arbitrary” measurement of density, depending simply on the arrangements of the substances in their order (pp. 215–216), would serve equally well. The true answer to our question is seen by remembering…that the terms between which laws express relationships are themselves based on laws and represent collections of other terms related by laws. When we measure a property, either by the fundamental process or by the derived process, the numeral which we assign to represent it is assigned as the result of experimental laws; the assignment implies laws. And therefore, in accordance with our principle, we should expect to find that other laws could be discovered relating the numerals so assigned to each other or to something else; while if we assigned numerals arbitrarily without reference to laws and implying no laws, then we should not find other laws involving these numerals. This expectation is abundantly fulfilled, and nowhere is there a clearer example of the fact that the terms involved in laws themselves imply laws. When we can measure a property truly, as we can volume (by the fundamental process) or density (by the derived process) then we are always able to find laws in which these properties are involved; we find, e.g., the law that volume is proportional to weight or that density determines, in a certain precise fashion, the sinking or floating of bodies. But when we cannot measure it truly, then we do not find a law. An example is provided by the property “hardness” (p. 216); the difficulties met with in arranging bodies in order of hardness have been overcome; but we still do not know of any way of measuring, by the derived process, the property hardness; we know of no numerical law which leads to a numeral which always follows the order of hardness. And so, as we expect, we do not know any accurate and general laws relating hardness to other properties. It is because true measurement is essential to the discovery of laws that it is of such vital importance to science. One final remark should be made before we pass on. In this chapter there has been much insistence on the distinction between fundamental measurement (such as is applicable to weight) and derived measurement (such as is applicable to density). And the distinction is supremely important, because it is the first kind of measurement which alone makes the second possible. But the reader who, when he studies some science in detail, tries, as he should, to discover which of the two processes is involved in the measurement of the various properties characteristic of that science, may occasionally find difficulty in answering the question. It should be pointed out, therefore, that it is quite possible for a property to be measurable by both processes. For all properties measurable by the fundamental process must have a definite order; for the physical property, number, to which they are so similar, has an order—the order of “more” or “less.” This order of number is reflected in the order of the numerals used to represent number. But if it is to be measurable by the derived process, it must also be such that it is also a “constant” in a numerical law—a term that is just going to be explained in the next chapter. There is nothing in the nature of fundamental measurement to show that a property to which it is applicable may not fulfil this condition also; and sometimes the condition is fulfilled, and then the property is measurable either by the fundamental or the derived process. However, it must be remembered that the properties involved in the numerical law must be such that they are fundamentally measurable; for otherwise the law could not be established. The neglect of this condition is apt to lead to confusion; but with this bare hint the matter must be left.