Work: Dante Field: dante Author: Thomas Stearns Eliot Title: NOTE TO SECTION II The theory of poetic belief and understanding here employed for a particular study is similar to that maintained by Mr. I.A.Richards (see his Practical Criticism, pp. 179 ff. and pp. 271 ff.). I say “similar,” because my own general theory is still embryonic, and Mr. Richards’ also is capable of much further development. I cannot therefore tell how far the similarity extends; but for those who are interested in the subject, I should point out one respect in which my view differs from that of Mr. Richards; and then proceed to qualifv my own tentative conclusions. I am in agreement with Mr. Richards’ statement on p. 271 (op. cit.). I agree for the reason that if you hold any contradictory theory you deny, I believe, the existence of “literature” as well as of “literary criticism.” We mav raise the question whether “literature” exists; but for certain purposes, such as the purpose of this essay on Dante, we must assume that there is literature and literary appreciation; we must assume that the reader can obtain the full “literary” or (if you will) “aesthetic” enjoyment without sharing the beliefs of the author. If there is “literature,” if there is “poetry,” then it must be possible to have full literary or poetic appreciation without sharing the beliefs of the poet. That is as far as my thesis goes in the present essay. It may be argued whether there is literature, whether there is poetry, and whether there is any meaning in the term “full appreciation.” But I have assumed for this essay that these things exist and that these terms are understood. I deny, in short, that the reader must share the beliefs of the poet in order to enjoy the poetry fully. I have also asserted that we can distinguish between Dante’s beliefs as a man and his beliefs as a poet. But we are forced to believe that there is a particular relation between the two, and that the poet “means what he says.” If we learned, for instance, that De Rerum Natura was a Latin exercise which Dante had composed for relaxation after completing the Divine Comedy, and published under the name of one Lucretius, I am sure that our capacity for enjoying either poem would be mutilated. Mr. Richards’ statement (Science and Poetry, p. 76 footnote) that a certain writer has effected “a complete severance between his poetry and all beliefs” is to me incomprehensible. If you deny the theory that full poetic appreciation is possible without belief in what the poet believed, you deny the existence of “poetry” as well as “criticism”; and if you push this denial to its conclusion, you will be forced to admit that there is very little poetry that you can appreciate, and that your appreciation of it will be a function of your philosophy or theology or something else. If, on the other hand, I push my theory to the extreme, I find myself in as great a difficulty. I am quite aware of the ambiguity of the word “understand.” In one sense, it means to understand without believing, for unless you can understand a view of life (let us say) without believing in it, the word “understand” loses all meaning, and the act of choice between one view and another is reduced to caprice. But if you yourself are convinced of a certain view of life, then you irresistibly and inevitably believe that if any one else comes to “understand” it fully, his understanding must terminate in belief. It is possible, and sometimes necessary, to argue that full understanding must identify itself with full belief. A good deal, it thus turns out, hangs on the meaning, if any, of this short word full. In short, both the view I have taken in this essay, and the view which contradicts it, are, if pushed to the end, what I call heresies (not, of course, in the theological, but in a more general sense). Each is true only within a limited field of discourse, but unless you limit fields of discourse, you can have no discourse at all. Orthodoxy can only be found in such contradictions, though it must be remembered that a pair of contradictions may both be false, and that not all pairs of contradictions make up a truth. And I confess to considerable difficulty in analysing my own feelings, a difficulty which makes me hesitate to accept Mr. Richards’ theory of “pseudo-statements.” On reading the line which he uses, Poem ```Beauty is truth, truth beauty…``` I am at first inclined to agree with him, because this statement of equivalence means nothing to me. But on re-reading the whole Ode, this line strikes me as a serious blemish on a beautiful poem; and the reason must be either that I fail to understand it, or that it is a statement which is untrue. And I suppose that Keats meant something by it, however remote his truth and his beauty may have been from these words in ordinary use. And I am sure that he would have repudiated any explanation of the line which called it a pseudo-statement. On the other hand the line I have often quoted of Shakespeare, Poem ```Ripeness is all,``` or the line I have quoted of Dante, Poem ```la sua voluntade è nostra pace,``` strikes very differently on my ear. I observe that the propositions in these words are very different in kind, not only from that of Keats, but from each other. The statement of Keats seems to me meaningless: or perhaps, the fact that it is grammatically meaningless conceals another meaning from me. The statement of Shakespeare seems to me to have profound emotional meaning, with, at least, no literal fallacy. And the statement of Dante seems to me literally true. And I confess that it has more beauty for me now, when my own experience has deepened its meaning, than it did when I first read it. So I can only conclude that I cannot, in practice, wholly separate my poetic appreciation from my personal beliefs. Also that the distinction between a statement and a pseudo-statement is not always, in particular instances, possible to establish. The theory of Mr. Richards is, I believe, incomplete until he defines the species of religious, philosophical, scientific, and other beliefs, as well as that of “everyday” belief. I have tried to make clear some of the difficulties inhering in my own theory. Actually, one probably has more pleasure in the poetry when one shares the beliefs of the poet. On the other hand there is a distinct pleasure in enjoying poetry as poetry when one does not share the beliefs, analogous to the pleasure of “mastering” other men’s philosophical systems. It would appear that “literary appreciation” is an abstraction, and pure poetry a phantom; and that both in creation and enjoyment much always enters which is, from the point of view of “Art,” irrelevant.