continue..
fractions; but once again division corresponds to a definite experimental operation and has its primary significance because it corresponds to that operation. This is this conclusion that we shall use in the sequel. But it is worth while noting that the fractions which we obtain by this method of addition overcome the difficulty from which this paragraph started. If we make all possible fractions of our original weight (i.e., all possible bodies, such that some number of them formed into a single collection have the same weight as the original body), then, by adding together suitable collections of these fractions, we can make up a collection which will have the same weight as any body whatever that we desire to weigh. This result is an experimental fact which could not have been predicted without experimental inquiry. And the result is true, not only for the measurable property weight, but for all properties measurable by the process that is applicable to weight. Once more we see how much simpler and more conveniently things turn out than we have really any right to expect; measurement would have been a much more complex business if the law that has just been stated were not always true. Derived Measurement. Measurement, it was said on p. 204, is the assignment of numbers (or, as we say now, numerals) to represent properties. We have now considered one way in which this assignment is made, and have brought to light the laws which must be true if this way is to be possible. And it is the fundamental way. We are now going to consider some other ways in which numerals are assigned to represent properties; but it is important to insist at the outset, and to remember throughout, that these other ways are wholly dependent upon the fundamental process, which we have just been discussing, and must be so dependent if the numerals are to represent “real properties” and to tell us something scientifically significant about the bodies to which they are attached. This statement is confirmed by history; all properties measured in the definitely pre-scientific era were measured (or at least measurable) by the fundamental process; that is true of weight, length, volume, area and periods of time. The dependent measurement, which we are now about to consider, is a product of definitely and consciously scientific investigation, although the actual discovery may, in a few cases, be lost in the mists of the past. The property which we shall take as an example of this dependent or, as it will be termed, derived measurement, is density. Every one has some idea of what density means and realizes, vaguely at least, why we say that iron is denser than wood or mercury than water; and most people probably know how density is measured, and what is meant when it is said that the density of iron is 8 times that of wood, and the density of mercury 13 1/2 times that of water. But they will feel also that there is something more scientific and less purely common-sense about the measurement of density than about the measurement of weight; as a matter of fact the discovery of the measurement of density certainly falls within the historic period and probably may be attributed to Archimedes (about 250 b.c.). And a little reflection will convince them that there is something essentially different in the two processes. For what we mean when we say a body has a weight 2 is that a body of the same weight can be made by combining 2 bodies of the weight 1; that is the fundamental meaning of weight; it is what makes weight physically important and, as we have just seen, makes it measurable. But when we say that mercury has a density 13 1/2 we do not mean that a body of the same density can be prepared by combining 13 1/2 bodies of the density 1 (water). For, if we did mean that, the statement would not be true. However many pieces of water we take, all of the same density, we cannot produce a body with any different density. Combine water with water as we will, the resulting body has the density of water. And this, a little reflection will show, is part of the fundamental meaning of density; density is something that is characteristic of all pieces of water, large and small. The density of water, a “quality” of it, is something fundamentally independent of and in contrast with the weight of water, the “quantity” of it. But the feature of density, from which it derives its importance, makes it totally impossible to measure density by the fundamental process discussed earlier in the chapter. How then do we measure it? Before we answer that question, it will be well to put another. As was insisted before, if measurement is really to mean anything, there must be some important resemblance between the property measured, on the one hand, and the numerals assigned to represent it, on the other. In fundamental measurement, this resemblance (or the most important part of it) arises from the fact that the property is susceptible to addition following the same rules as that of number, with which numerals are so closely associated. That resemblance fails here. What resemblance is left? Measurement and Order. There is left a resemblance in respect of “order.” The numerals are characterized, in virtue of their use to represent numbers, by a definite order; they are conventionally arranged in a series in which the sequence is determined: “2” follows “1” and is before “3”; “3” follows “2” and is before “4” and so on. This characteristic order of numerals is applied usefully for many purposes in modern life; we “number” the pages of a book or the houses of a street, not in order to know the number of pages in the book or of houses in the street—nobody but the printer or the rate-surveyor cares about that—but in order to be able to find any given page or house easily. If we want p. 201 and the book opens casually at p. 153 we know in which direction to turn the pages. Order then is characteristic of numerals; it is also characteristic of the properties represented by numerals in the manner we are considering now. This is our feature which makes the “measurement” significant. Thus, in our example, bodies have a natural order of density which is independent of actual measurement. We might define the words “denser” or “less dense” as applied to liquids (and the definition could easily be extended to solids) by saying that the liquid A is denser than B, and B less dense than A, if a substance can be found which will float in A but not in B. And, if we made the attempt, we should find that by use of this definition we could place all liquids in a definite order, such that each member of the series was denser than the preceding and less dense than the following member. We might then assign to the first liquid the density 1, to the second 2, and so on; and we should then have assigned numerals in a way which would be physically significant and indicate definite physical facts. The fact that A was represented by 2 and B by 7 would mean that there was some solid body which would float in B, but not in A. We should have achieved something that might fairly be called measurement. Here again it is important to notice that the possibility of such measurement depends upon definite laws; we could not have predicted beforehand that such an arrangement of liquids was possible unless we knew these laws. One law involved is this: If B is denser than A, and C denser than B, then C is denser than A. That sounds like a truism; but it is not. According to our definition it implies that the following statement is always true: If a body X floats in B and sinks in A, then if another body Y sinks in B it will also sink in A. That is a statement of facts; nothing but experiment could prove that it is true; it is a law. And if it were not true, we could not arrange liquids naturally in a definite order. For the test with X would prove that B was denser than A, while the test with Y (floating in A, but sinking in B) would prove that A was denser than B. Are we then to put A before or after B in the order of density? We should not know. The order would be indeterminate and, whether we assigned a higher or a lower numeral to A than to B, the assignment would represent no definite physical fact: it would be arbitrary. In order to show that the difficulty might occur, and that it is an experimental law that it does not