Work: White Nights Field: white nights Author: Fyodor Dostorvsky Title: THE SECOND NIGHT “So you survived after all,” she said to me, laughing as she pressed my hands. “I’ve been waiting for two hours. You can’t imagine how I got through the day.” “I know, I know…. But let’s talk business. Do you know why I really came? Certainly not to talk nonsense as we did last night. You know, from now on, we’ll act more intelligently. I thought a lot about it last night.” “In what? More intelligently in what? I agree to whatever you say, but to be absolutely sincere, it seems to me I’ve never been cleverer than now in my whole life.” “Is that so? Well, in the first place, I’d like you to stop squeezing my hands like that, and in the second, I wish to inform you that today I’ve given quite a bit of thought to you.” “And what conclusions have you reached?” “Conclusions? Well, I decided to start all over again because I concluded that I still knew nothing about you, that yesterday I acted like a child, a little girl—and I ended up blaming everything on my over-sensitive heart. In other words, I ended up praising myself—the way we always end when we begin analyzing ourselves. Now, to correct that mistake, I’ve decided to find out every little thing about you. And since I have no other way of finding out, you’ll just have to supply me with all the information. So, what manner of man are you? Quick, start telling me your story!” “My story!” I said, becoming alarmed. “What makes you think I have a story to tell in the first place? In fact I don’t have any—” She laughed. “But how could you live and have no story to tell?” “So far I’ve lived without any stories at all. I’ve lived keeping to myself, as they say, which means that I’ve been completely alone. Alone, all alone—do you understand what that means?” “What do you mean alone? You never saw anyone?” “No, I saw people, of course. But still I was all alone.” “What then? You mean you never spoke to anyone?” “Strictly speaking, I didn’t.” “But who are you, anyway? Tell me! No, wait—I think I can guess. I’ll bet you have a grandmother, as I do. Mine is blind, and she doesn’t let me go anywhere—I almost forget how to talk. A couple of years ago, when I misbehaved, she felt she couldn’t control me any longer, so she called me over to her and pinned my dress to hers with a safety pin. Sometimes we sit like that for days at a time, she knitting a sock despite her blindness and me, at her side, sewing or reading something aloud to her. So, I’ve been pinned to someone for two years, a rather strange situation, don’t you think?” “Ah, that’s really awful! But I don’t have a grandmother.” “You haven’t? Then how can you sit home all the time?” “Listen, shall I tell you who I am?” “Yes, of course.” “Shall I tell you exactly?” “Yes, exactly.” “All right then, I’m a queer fish.” “So, you’re a queer fish, are you? What sort of queer fish?” the girl said, exploding with laughter, as if she had been holding it in for a whole year. “Ah, you’re really great fun to be with! Let’s sit down on that bench over there. Nobody every passes there, so you can tell me your story without being overheard. Go on now, I want to hear it! You can’t make me believe you have nothing to tell; you’re just being secretive. First of all, what’s a queer fish?” “A queer fish? A queer fish is a ridiculous man, a man unlike others,” I said, infected by her childish laughter. “He’s a sort of freak. Listen, do you know what a dreamer is, for instance?” “A dreamer? Well, how could I not know what a dreamer is? I suppose I’m one myself. You can’t imagine what things go through my head sometimes as I sit next to my grandmother! I plunge into my dreams, and sometimes, when I really get going, I reach a point where I marry a Chinese prince…. Why, sometimes it’s so nice to dream!” But then she added unsmilingly: “Well, not really! Especially when there are other things to think of.” “Wonderful! Since you’ve already been married to a Chinese potentate, you’ll probably be able to understand me too. So listen… But wait, I don’t even know your name.” “It’s Nastenka.” “Nastenka. Is that all?” “Is that all! Nothing satisfies you. You seem to be insatiable.” “Ah, no, it satisfies me all right, it thoroughly satisfies me! You’re a very nice girl to become Nastenka for me right away!” “That’s better! But go on, tell me about yourself.” “All right, Nastenka, listen to this ridiculous story then.” I installed myself on the bench next to her, assumed a grave, theatrical pose, and began, as if I were reading the script of a monologue. “There are, my dear Nastenka, in case you don’t know, some rather strange corners in Petersburg. It’s as if the sun that warms the rest of the city never shines on them, and instead another sun, especially designed for them, supplies them with a different light. In those corners, Nastenka, a life goes on quite unlike the one seething around us, a life that is possible in some faraway dreamland but certainly not here in our overserious time. That life is a mixture of something out of pure fantasy, ardently idealistic, with, alas, something bleak and dull and ordinary, not to say outright vulgar.” “Brrr! …What an introduction! What am I to hear next?” “You’ll hear, Nastenka—I think I’ll never get tired of calling you Nastenka—that dreamers live in those corners. A dreamer, if you want me to define him, is not a real human being but a sort of intermediary creature. He usually installs himself in some remote corner, shrinking even from the daylight. And once he’s installed in that corner of his, he grows into it like a snail or at least like that curious thing which is at the same time an animal and a house—the tortoise. And why do you think he so loves his four bleak walls that are sooty, reek unspeakably of tobacco smoke, and are always daubed over with green paint? Why do you think this ridiculous creature, when some rare acquaintance comes to see him (ultimately he’s bound to lose all his acquaintances anyway), looks so embarrassed and taken aback, as if he’d just committed a crime between those very walls, as if he’d been forging money or writing verses to be sent to a magazine with an anonymous letter explaining that the author of the piece is dead and that the sender considers it his sacred duty to see the poem published? Why do you think, Nastenka, that conversation between the two of them is so painful? Why can’t the visitor laugh or say something amusing now? In other circumstances he is prone to laugh, say amusing things, and chat about the fair sex and other pleasant matters. Why does that acquaintance, probably a recent one, on his very first visit—for under such circumstances there cannot be more than one visit, as no friend returns for a second time—even assuming that he’s exceptionally perceptive, why does he feel so awkward looking at the agonized face of his host, who, after desperate but futile efforts to comfort the hapless man who has blundered into his house on a friendly visit by making the conversation flow, giving it some sparkle, and showing that he too is fully aware of elegant ways and can talk about the fair sex, has become completely lost by then. And why, in the end, does the visitor suddenly remember that he has some terribly urgent matter to attend to, grab his hat and dart off, managing to free his hand from the warm pressure of his host’s while the host tries by every means possible to show that he’s sorry and is trying to redeem himself? Why does the departing visitor laugh as he closes the door behind him and promise himself never to return to the house of that queer fish, although deep down the queer fish really means well? Why, at the same time, is the visitor unable to refrain from comparing his host’s face during his visit to a kitten perfidiously captured, manhandled, and scared by children—which kitten then, completely bewildered, hides under some chair in the darkness, and can’t help bristling and spitting while he washes his offended little face with his front paws, and even after that, goes around for a long time looking with apprehension and hostility at the world and even at the tidbits from the master’s table saved for him by a compassionate housekeeper?” “Now look here,” Nastenka interrupted me. She had been listening