continue..
the astronomical heavens in mathematical order. Everything was settled into its place, or almost everything. There remained one or two minute somethings. When the most elaborate calculations had been completed, there remained a little unexplained fluctuation in the movement of the moon, so often accused of fickleness by the poets; and one planet, fitly named after Mercury, the not overrighteous messenger of the gods in classical mythology, was found to be acting in a manner inconsistent with strict mathematical propriety. The vagaries of Mercury were very slight: its orbit is far more tilted than that of any other planet, and is more swiftly traversed than that of any other planet; but the vagaries could not be explained by tilt or speed, and their source (that is, the cause of the difference between what is actually seen and what calculation led astronomers to expect) could not be discovered. The irregularities made no difference to daily life: they made no other difference to astronomical life: but there they were. Nature would not change so as to conform to man’s explanation, so man’s explanation must be examined in order to be brought into conformity with nature. The accuracy of the calculations could not humanly be challenged, for they obeyed every test that human reason could devise. Perhaps there was something, an extremely tiny something somewhere (for, remember, the deviations are extremely slight), something wrong in the fundamental assumptions upon which the calculations were based. And here is an illustration of the difference between practice and thought: “to stop that nonsense” an engineer would have driven a rivet, would have inserted a guiding slot, would have added a tightening chain round the dome of St. Paul’s. But rivets and slots and chains are devastations in thought, not remedies: so the fundamental assumptions must be revised. It had been assumed that the solar system is fixed, absolutely fixed, in the universe: is that dogma true? Even if it is not true, the alternative of a wandering solar system would hardly explain the minute domestic vagaries of one rather insignificant member. It had been assumed that the measurement of the same thing, in varying circumstances and at diverse times, made as accurate as human skill can achieve, and corrected for every incidental error that human skill can detect, is always the same, whatever be the time and the place of the thing measured and the measurement made. The dogma seems an obvious inference from what we are pleased to call common sense: like so many obvious things, it cannot be proved and it cannot be submitted to adequate test: in fact, common sense continues to call it obvious. But how if it be not true? Your standard of measurement, used to measure a magnitude in passing time and on a moving body, would change in the same way (if at all) as the measured magnitude, and you could not detect the change, if there be change: and, in that case, your measures would no longer be absolute: they would be relative, perhaps to time, perhaps to place or change of place, perhaps to the way of change. Nothing remains absolute: yet that was a fundamental assumption, stated explicitly, in the Newtonian philosophy. Now this notion of relativity is not new: it did not come into scientific thought with Einstein: it was not unknown to Newton himself: and men have pondered over it often in the last fifty years. But there is the customary difficulty: an idea may come into the range of thought: how can it be garbed in expression, for discussion, for calculation? You will remember the wisdom of a character in George Eliot’s Theophrastus Such, “There’s some as thinks one thing: there’s some as thinks another thing: but my opinion’s different.” Men, charging themselves with the formulation of relativity, have devised various modes of its mathematical expression; and, so far as concerns astronomy, there is not the unanimity of expression which, if there, would be a rudimentary recommendation. It was the work of Einstein which was the first to explain—or, at any rate, to account for—the behaviour of Mercury: and therefore it is to Einstein that the glory rightly accrues. The method of Einstein, however, is not the sole one that gives an explanation; for the mathematical methods of other men have also led to that result, after Einstein. But neither the method of Einstein nor the method of any other mathematician has yet succeeded in explaining the slight caprice of the moon. How far the popular expositors had made themselves acquainted with the investigations in all accessible issues, before some of them tried to make our flesh creep with their pronouncement upon the passing of gravitation, might be the curious quest of some doubting scientific Thomas Didymus. But of one thing we may be reasonably sure: neither in that theory, nor in any other living theory, has the last word been said. For the last words of all are the epitaph on a tomb: and the Newtonian theory is still alive sufficiently to provide man with a working hypothesis of the natural universe in which he lives. Before I close, there are two inferences which I would appeal to you not to draw from my lecture. It is not the fact that the services of mathematics are restricted to the subjects that have been selected for mention or illustration. It is not the fact that the science of mathematics exists or thrives, solely or mainly in order to find or to further applications in other sciences. The range of human activities, within which mathematics and the ideas of mathematics are called upon or are utilized for service, is so vast and so varied that I can do no more, at this stage, than mention the names of some of the regions where the science of mathematics is active. Enough has been said on the score of astronomy. In engineering of every type, ranging from the ancient ship of the sea to the modern ship of the air, in your buildings, in your bridges, in your tunnels, its help is indispensable. Is it an occupation so sedate as book-keeping, say by double entry? That process is but an iterated application of the use of the plus and minus signs of algebra, though the book-keeper is not usually aware of the fact. Is it a science so relatively modern as physical chemistry? Much of that science is based upon the mathematical expression of some of the laws of change in physical nature. Is it a science which apparently is so far remote from the usual conception of mathematics as is physiology, the science of the processes of living organisms? That human science is examining the phenomena of the activities of such organisms, is expressing quantitatively those activities, is dealing mathematically with those quantitative expressions: there are the researches on the expenditure of muscular energy, the researches on industrial fatigue. Did not a sectional president startle the British Association the other day by hinting (though without adequate justification) that a distinguished physiologist, trained as a mathematician and using his knowledge, was on the verge of discovering the mystery of life itself? Is it the spotting of invisible guns on a far-flung battlefield? My friend and former colleague, your worthy professor of mathematics in this College, could tell you of the combined efforts of mathematicians and physicists who, by means of instruments and calculations connected with the properties of sound, were able to devise means of approximate location. And those same properties were used, in connection with mathematical instruments constructed for the purpose, to detect, from the surface of the sea, not merely the fact, but the direction of approach, of a hostile submarine. The citations of utility could be continued almost without limit: only one other subject will be indicated. If there is anything that appeals to the average inhabitant of these islands and is a frequent topic of unfruitful conversation, it is the weather: and a feature of our morning newspaper is the forecast issued by the Meteorological Office. But the occupants of that office are not like the ancient soothsayers, waiting for inspiration from gifts tendered and from sacrifices rendered. They collect scattered information, co-ordinate that information by settled mathematical processes, draw their mathematical diagrams to represent that co-ordinated information, and, inferring tendencies from movements indicated by their diagrams, issue their calculated forecast. All these—there are more that crowd into the mind—may be an adequate recital showing how essential and how extensive is the service rendered by the rather silent science of mathematics to the practical life of mankind. Most of all, I would not wish to have you possessed by the notion that the pursuit of mathematics by human thought must be justified by its utility for practical uses in life. Such a justification would, it is true, require the inclusion of mathematics in the scheme of any university where technical studies are deemed important; and in the growing prosperity of your University