continue..
present time, parts of the country are soon to be covered with a vast network of wires, stretching from pier to pier, for the transmission of electric power from central stations to relatively remote places where the power cannot be generated and cannot otherwise be obtained or concentrated. All sorts of complicated questions of an engineering kind arise, as fundamental in their way as questions connected with the construction of a liner to cross the Atlantic or a bridge to span the Ganges: questions of stress, of strain, of strength to face unknown but imaginable conditions which may become grimly real; and the answers are the results of mathematical calculations. These calculations are made in an office, but they do not remain in the office: they are utilized to indicate critical tests and to adapt given possibilities for the making of those tests in a variety of external conditions. Not until all the tests are satisfied would the engineers be justified in proceeding to their work: and engineers know, and can imagine, better than all others concerned, how much superfluous labour has been saved by the mathematical calculations. There were days when the telegraph, overhead or submarine, was at once a new toy and a new mystery. Once the springs of action were known, their doings were regularized by instruments devised on a mathematical basis. Systematic processes were thus possible: their mathematical basis was worked out by Lord Kelvin (then Professor William Thomson) especially for submarine cables; and through his double genius for mathematics and for engineering applications of mathematics, the telegraph took its place in the routine of daily life. Now it is so ordinary, almost so stale and so old-fashioned, as to seem on the verge of supersession. For you are surrounded by wireless telegraphy at every turn; the beginnings of telephotography are being made whereby you may see in your evening paper a transmitted photograph of some event occurring only a few hours earlier perhaps some thousands of miles away. Does it ever occur to jaded satisfaction to inquire how so much has come into ordinary life which even in our grandfathers’ age would have been declared impossible or fanciful? The story is not long, though the labour has been multitudinous. Probably any historian of modern electrical science would be prepared to acknowledge Faraday’s researches as the beginning of a new epoch. Great as was his genius, and valuable as were those researches, Faraday left them largely as a treasury of rich results, fundamental in bearing, capable of ordered development from their experimental stage and wisely formulated laws, but still undeveloped. Then another genius with another bent, Maxwell the mathematician, regarded the quantitative results obtained by Faraday as the material for systematic mathematical analysis; and the monument of his life is his ordered mathematical exposition of a new mathematical theory of electricity and magnetism founded on the Faraday results. But, as so often has been the fact in the movements of human knowledge, when once the accurate scientific observations received their systematic treatment by mathematics, interesting possibilities were revealed that hitherto had not even been surmised; and one immediate consequence of Maxwell’s work was his creation of an electro-magnetic theory of light, through the identification of a relation between certain electrical constants and the speed of the transmission of light. The notion of waves and vibrations now entered boldly into the discussion. Another mathematical genius, Hertz, developed the consequences of the Maxwell theory and, by his calculations, obtained inferences in advance of observed results. The constructive genius of engineers—Marconi is a typical and outstanding example—was fired to new efforts in practical application. Soon there was the initial sending of messages through space (call it the ether, if you choose, but do not suppose that a name implies knowledge) from one land to another, from land to ocean and ocean to land: last Sunday’s armistice service in Trafalgar Square in London was heard in New Zealand. Let me leave you in the middle of sounds, which may come from a studio near at hand or a continental orchestra perhaps in Rome or Madrid: and in all your surprise and happiness do not entirely forget that, throughout the development, the science of mathematics has played, is playing, and will continue to play, its significant part in every endeavour. Electrical engineering is not wholly electrical, in practice or in theory: its successes are achieved not solely through its machinery, however elaborate. Behind all its progress, as part of the reasoning mind of it all, there labours the science of mathematics as an angel of human thought. Perhaps it is in astronomy that the most picturesque instances of the use of mathematics have occurred. You all have read of the fall of an apple in a Norfolk garden: how that fall made Newton ponder: and how the scribes (sparing us details perhaps not always known to them) tell us that Newton thence discovered the theory of gravitation. Will you be indulgent if, with only a fragment of calculation and confessedly for an ulterior purpose, I attempt to give you an outline of the process of thought which led to that theory? Without going back to the beginnings of dynamical science, it will be sufficient to recall one of the experimental observations of Galilei, now almost commonplace enough to be ignored; then novel enough to startle old conceptions, ultimately to destroy some dogmas of theological (I do not say religious) belief, and to recast human ideas of the cosmic universe. He inferred that a dropped stone fell straight down, that is, towards the centre of the earth, because the descent, wherever tried, is always straight down. He also inferred that, in its movement, the stone fell four times as far in the first two seconds as it did in the first, nine times as far in the first three seconds as it did in the first: and so on for the succession of seconds from the beginning: the distance fallen in any number of seconds is measured by the result of taking that number and multiplying it by itself, “squaring it,” as we mathematicians call the calculation. But this only gives a comparative measure among different periods: something more is wanted in order to state what we popularly call an exact measure. Such a statement demands a knowledge of the exact distance that the stone would fall in a specified time; for example, the exact distance the stone would fall in five seconds from the beginning of its movement. He had noted observations also which answered the demand: the result of calculations (always there is calculation) showed that there is a number, very slightly larger than sixteen (but let me call it sixteen for brevity of statement), which is of crucial importance. Return now to the measure of the distance through which the stone falls. We saw that the distance is, first of all, measured by a number which is the square of the number of seconds (the number of seconds multiplied by itself). We take that square number, which gives the first and the sort of relative estimate of the fall, and we multiply that square number by the crucial number sixteen, no matter what the square number may have been. The product—what a schoolboy calls the “answer”—is the exact distance through which the stone has fallen in the specified time, when the distance is measured in English feet. Thus in three seconds the distance would be 144 ft.: for the square of three (that is, three multiplied by three) is 9, and the result of multiplying 9 by the crucial number 16 is 144. In five seconds the fall would be 400 ft.: for the square of five (that is, five multiplied by five) is 25, and the result of multiplying 25 by the crucial number 16 is 400. And so on. Let me ask you to remember that the fall of the stone is measured by the square of the number of seconds in the duration of the fall: above all, to remember that there is a crucial number sixteen. Now an explanation of the movements of the planets was being attained, though very gradually. The Copernican opinion, that they moved round the sun as a fixed body, was making its way, because the more it was tested the more continually did it accord with facts. The observations of Tycho Brahe had been reduced to systematic results by the industry of Kepler, who found that planets move almost in circles, actually in oval curves (mathematicians call them ellipses), with the sun in the supreme position at the focus: and these ovals differ from circles only very slightly. But that discovery of Kepler’s was only descriptive, corresponding to the description of a stone as falling straight down: it was no sort of measure of the movement of a planet. Such a measure came, once more, from Kepler’s labours: he established two great inferences, laws as they are called. One law