Work: The Cherry Orchard Field: cherry orchard Author: Anton Chekhov Title: ACT I A room that is still called the nursery. One of the doors leads into anya’s room . Dawn, the sun will soon rise. It is May, the cherry trees are in blossom, but it is cold in the orchard; there is a morning frost. The windows are shut. Enter dunyasha with a candle, and lopahin with a book in his hand . Lopahin. The train is in, thank God. What time is it? Dunyasha. Nearly two. (Puts out the candle.) It’s light already. Lopahin. How late is the train, anyway? Two hours at least. (Yawns and stretches.) I’m a fine one! What a fool I’ve made of myself! I came here on purpose to meet them at the station, and then I went and overslept. I fell asleep in my chair. How annoying! You might have waked me… Dunyasha. I thought you’d left. (Listens.) I think they’re coming! Lopahin (listens). No, they’ve got to get the luggage, and one thing and another…(Pause.) Lubov Andreyevna spent five years abroad, I don’t know what she’s like now…She’s a fine person—light-hearted, simple. I remember when I was a boy of fifteen, my poor father—he had a shop here in the village then—punched me in the face with his fist and made my nose bleed. We’d come into the yard, I don’t know what for, and he’d had a drop too much. Lubov Andreyevna, I remember her as if it were yesterday—she was still young and so slim—led me to the washbasin, in this very room… in the nursery. “Don’t cry, little peasant,” she said, “it’ll heal in time for your wedding….” (Pause.) Little peasant…my father was a peasant, it’s true, and here I am in a white waistcoat and yellow shoes. A pig in a pastry shop, you might say. It’s true I’m rich, I’ve got a lot of money…. But when you look at it closely, I’m a peasant through and through. (Pages the book.) Here I’ve been reading this book and I didn’t understand a word of it…. I was reading it and fell asleep…. (Pause.) Dunyasha. And the dogs were awake all night, they feel that their masters are coming. Lopahin. Dunyasha, why are you so— Dunyasha. My hands are trembling. I’m going to faint. Lopahin. You’re too soft, Dunyasha. You dress like a lady, and look at the way you do your hair. That’s not right. One should remember one’s place. Enter Y epihodov with a bouquet; he wears a jacket and highly polished boots that squeak badly . He drops the bouquet as he comes in. Yepihodov (picking up the bouquet). Here, the gardener sent these, said you’re to put them in the dining room. (Hands the bouquet to dunyasha.) Lopahin. And bring me some kvass. Dunyasha. Yes, Sir. (Exits.) Yepihodov. There’s a frost this morning—three degrees below—and yet the cherries are all in blossom. I cannot approve of our climate. (Sighs.) I cannot. Our climate does not activate properly. And, Yermolay Alexeyevich, allow me to make a further remark. The other day I bought myself a pair of boots, and I make bold to assure you, they squeak so that it is really intolerable. What should I grease them with? Lopahin. Oh, get out! I’m fed up with you. Yepihodov. Every day I meet with misfortune. And I don’t complain, I’ve got used to it, I even smile. dunyasha enters, hands lopahin the kvass . Yepihodov. I am leaving. (Stumbles against a chair, which falls over.) There! (Triumphantly, as it were.) There again, you see what sort of circumstance, pardon the expression…. It is absolutely phenomenal! (Exits.) Dunyasha. You know, Yermolay Alexeyevich, I must tell you, Yepihodov has proposed to me. Lopahin. Ah! Dunyasha. I simply don’t know…he’s a quiet man, but sometimes when he starts talking, you can’t make out what he means. He speaks nicely—and it’s touching—but you can’t understand it. I sort of like him though, and he is crazy about me. He’s an unlucky man… every day something happens to him. They tease him about it here…they call him Two-and-Twenty Troubles. Lopahin (listening). There! I think they’re coming. Dunyasha. They are coming! What’s the matter with me? I feel cold all over. Lopahin. They really are coming. Let’s go and meet them. Will she recognize me? We haven’t seen each other for five years. Dunyasha (in a flutter). I’m going to faint this minute…. Oh, I’m going to faint! Two carriages are heard driving up to the house. lopahin and dunyasha go out quickly . The stage is left empty. There is a noise in the adjoining rooms. firs , who had driven to the station to meet lubov andreyevna ranevskaya , crosses the stage hurriedly, leaning on a stick . He is wearing an old-fashioned livery and a tall hat. He mutters to himself indistinctly. The hubbub off stage increases. a voice : “Come, let’s go this way.” Enter lubov andreyevna , anya and charlotta ivanovna , with a pet dog on a leash, all in traveling dresses; varya , wearing a coat and kerchief; gayev , simeonovpishchik , lopahin , dunyasha with a bag and an umbrella, servants with luggage . All walk across the room . Anya. Let’s go this way. Do you remember what room this is, Mamma? Mme. Ranevskaya (joyfully, through her tears). The nursery! Varya. How cold it is! My hands are numb. (To mme. ranevskaya.) Your rooms are just the same as they were Mamma, the white one and the violet. Mme. Ranevskaya. The nursery! My darling, lovely room! I slept here when I was a child…(Cries.) And here I am, like a child again! (Kisses her brother and varya, and then her brother again.) Varya’s just the same as ever, like a nun. And I recognized Dunyasha. (Kisses dunyasha.) Gayev. The train was two hours late. What do you think of that? What a way to manage things! Charlotta (to pishchik). My dog eats nuts, too. Pishchik (in amazement). You don’t say so! All go out, except anya and dunyasha . Dunyasha. We’ve been waiting for you for hours. (Takes anya’s hat and coat.) Anya. I didn’t sleep on the train for four nights and now I’m frozen… Dunyasha. It was Lent when you left; there was snow and frost, and now…My darling! (Laughs and kisses her.) I have been waiting for you, my sweet, my darling! But I must tell you something…I can’t put it off another minute… Anya (listlessly). What now? Dunyasha. The clerk, Yepihodov, proposed to me, just after Easter. Anya. There you are, at it again…(Straightening her hair.) I’ve lost all my hairpins…(She is staggering with exhaustion.) Dunyasha. Really, I don’t know what to think. He loves me—he loves me so! Anya (looking towards the door of her room, tenderly). My own room, my windows, just as though I’d never been away. I’m home! Tomorrow morning I’ll get up and run into the orchard. Oh, if I could only get some sleep. I didn’t close my eyes during the whole journey—I was so anxious. Dunyasha. Pyotr Sergeyevich came the day before yesterday. Anya (joyfully). Petya! Dunyasha. He’s asleep in the bathhouse. He has settled there. He said he was afraid of being in the way. (Looks at her watch.) I should wake him, but Miss Varya told me not to. “Don’t you wake him,” she said. Enter varya with a bunch of keys at her belt . Varya. Dunyasha, coffee, and be quick…Mamma’s asking for coffee. Dunyasha. In a minute. (Exits.) Varya. Well, thank God, you’ve come. You’re home again. (Fondling anya.) My darling is here again. My pretty one is back. Anya. Oh, what I’ve been through! Varya. I can imagine. Anya. When we left, it was Holy Week, it was cold then, and all the way Charlotta chattered and did her tricks. Why did you have to saddle me with Charlotta? Varya. You couldn’t have traveled all alone, darling—at seventeen! Anya. We got to Paris, it was cold there, snowing. My French is dreadful. Mamma lived on the fifth floor; I went up there, and found all kinds of Frenchmen, ladies, an old priest with a book. The place was full of tobacco smoke, and so bleak. Suddenly I felt sorry for Mamma, so sorry, I took her head in my arms and hugged her and couldn’t let go of her. Afterwards Mamma kept fondling me and crying… Varya (through tears). Don’t speak of it…don’t. Anya. She had already sold her villa at Mentone, she had nothing left, nothing. I hadn’t a kopeck left either, we had only just enough to get home. And Mamma wouldn’t understand! When we had dinner at the stations, she always ordered the most expensive dishes, and tipped the waiters a whole ruble. Charlotta, too. And Yasha kept ordering, too—it was simply awful. You know Yasha’s Mamma’s footman now, we brought him here with us. Varya. Yes, I’ve seen the blackguard.