continue..
eravamo e senza alcun sospetto. Per più fiate gli occhi ci sospinse quella lettura, e scolorocci il viso; ma solo un punto fu quel che ci vinse. Quando leggemmo il disiato riso esser baciato da cotanto amante, questi, che mai da me non fia diviso, La bocca mi baciò tutto tremante:``` One day, for pastime, we read of Lancelot, how love constrained him; we were alone, and without all suspicion. Several times that reading urged our eyes to meet, and changed the colour of our faces; but one moment alone it was that overcame us. When we read how the fond smile was kissed by such a lover, he, who shall never be divided from me, kissed my mouth all trembling. When we come to fit the episode into its place in the whole Comedy, and see how this punishment is related to all other punishments and to purgations and rewards, we can appreciate better the subtle psychology of the simple line of Francesca: Poem ```se fosse amico il re dell’ universo``` if the King of the Universe were our friend…. or of the line Poem ```Amor, che a nullo amato amar perdona``` Love, which to no loved one permits excuse for loving…. or indeed of the line already quoted: Poem ```questi, che mai da me non fia diviso``` he, who shall never be divided from me…. Proceeding through the Inferno on a first reading, we get a succession of phantasmagoric but clear images, of images which are coherent, in that each reinforces the last; of glimpses of individuals made memorable by a perfect phrase, like that of the proud Farinata degli Uberti: Poem ```ed ei s’ ergea col petto e colla fronte, come avesse lo inferno in gran dispitto.``` He rose upright with breast and countenance, as though he entertained great scorn of Hell. and of particular longer episodes, which remain separately in the memory. I think that among those which impress themselves most at the first reading are the episode of Brunetto Latini (Canto xv), Ulysses (Canto xxvi), Bertrand de Born (Canto xxviii), Adamo di Brescia (Canto xxx), and Ugolino (Canto xxxiii). Although I think it would be a mistake to skip, and find it much better to await these episodes until we come to them in due course, they certainly remain in my memory as the parts of the Inferno which first convinced me, and especially the Brunetto and the Ulysses episodes, for which I was unprepared by quotation or allusion. And the two may well be put together: for the first is Dante’s testimony of a loved master of arts, the second his reconstruction of a legendary figure of ancient epic; yet both have the quality of surprise which Poe declared to be essential to poetry. This surprise, at its highest, could by nothing be better illustrated than by the final lines with which Dante dismisses the damned master whom he loves and respects: Poem ```Poi si rivolse, e parve di coloro che coronno a Verona il drappo verde per la campagna; e parve di costoro quegli che vince e non colui che perde.``` Then he turned, and seemed like one of those who run for the green cloth at Verona through the open field; and of them he seemed like him who wins, and not like him who loses. One does not need to know anything about the race for the roll of green cloth, to be hit by these lines; and in making Brunetto, so fallen, run like the winner, a quality is given to the punishment which belongs only to the greatest poetry. So Ulysses, unseen in the hornèd wave of flame, Poem ```Lo maggior corno della fiamma antica cominciò a crollarsi mormorando, pur come quella cui vento affatica. Indi la cima qua e là menando, come fosse la lingua che parlasse, gittò voce di fuori e disse: “Quando mi diparti’ da Circe, che sottrasse me più d’un anno la presso a Gaeta….”``` The greater horn of the ancient flame began to shake itself murmuring, like a flame struggling against the wind. Then moving to and fro the peak, as though it were the tongue that spoke, threw forth a voice and said: “When I left Circe, who kept me more than a year there near Gaeta….” is a creature of the pure poetic imagination, apprehensible apart from place and time and the scheme of the poem. The Ulysses episode may strike us first as a kind of excursion, an irrelevance, a self-indulgence on the part of Dante taking a holiday from his Christian scheme. But when we know the whole poem, we recognize how cunningly and convincingly Dante has made to fit in real men, his contemporaries, friends, and enemies, recent historical personages, legendary and Biblical figures, and figures of ancient fiction. He has been reproved or smiled at for satisfying personal grudges by putting in Hell men whom he knew and hated; but these, as well as Ulysses, are transformed in the whole; for the real and the unreal are all representative of types of sin, suffering, fault, and merit, and all become of the same reality and contemporary. The Ulysses episode is particularly “readable,” I think, because of its continuous straightforward narrative, and because to an English reader the comparison with Tennyson’s poem—a perfect poem at that—is very instructive. It is worth while noticing the greatly superior degree of simplification of Dante’s version. Tennyson, like most poets, like most even of those whom we can call great poets, has to get his effect with a certain amount of forcing. Thus the line about the sea which Poem ```moans round with many voices,``` a true specimen of Tennyson-Virgilianism, is too poetical in comparison with Dante, to be the highest poetry. (Only Shakespeare can be so “poetical” without giving any effect of overloading, or distracting us from the main issue: Poem ```Put up your bright swords or the dew will rust them.)``` Ulysses and his shipmates pass through the pillars of Hercules, that “narrow pass” Poem ```ov’ Ercole segnò li suoi riguardi acciochè l’uom più oltre non si metta.``` where Hercules set his marks, so that man should pass no farther. Poem ```“O frati,” dissi, “che per cento milia perigli siete giunti all’ occidente, a questa tanto picciola vigilia de’ vostri sensi, ch’ è del rimanente, non vogliate negar l’esperienza di retro al sol, del mondo senza gente. Considerate la vostra semenza, fatti non foste a viver come bruti ma per seguir virtute e conoscenza.”``` “O brothers!” I said, “who through a hundred thousand dangers have reached the West, deny not, to this so brief vigil of your senses that remains, experience of the world without men that lies behind the sun. Consider your nature, you were made not to live like beasts, but to pursue virtue and knowledge.” They fare forth until suddenly Poem ```n’apparve una montagna bruna per la distanza, e parvemi alta tanto quanto veduta non n’aveva alcuna. Noi ci allegrammo, e tosto tornò in pianto, chè dalla nuova terra un turbo nacque, e percosse del legno il primo canto. Tre volte il fe’ girar con tutte l’acque, alla quarta levar la poppa in suso, e la prora ire in giù, com’ altrui piacque, infin che il mar fu sopra noi richiuso.``` there appeared a mountain brown in the distance; and it seemed to me the highest that I had ever seen. We rejoiced, but soon our joy was turned to lamentation: for a storm came up from the new land, and caught the stem of our ship. Three times it whirled her round with all the waters; the fourth time it heaved up the stern and drove her down at the head, as pleased Another; until the sea closed over us. The story of Ulysses, as told by Dante, reads like a straightforward piece of romance, a well told seaman’s yarn; Tennyson’s Ulysses is primarily a very self-conscious poet. But Tennyson’s poem is flat, it has only two dimensions; there is nothing more in it than what the average Englishman, with a feeling for verbal beauty, can see. We do not need, at first, to know what mountain the mountain was, or what the words mean as pleased Another, to feel that Dante’s sense has further depths. It is worth pointing out again how very right was Dante to introduce among his historical characters at least one character who even to him could hardly have been more than a fiction. For the Inferno is relieved from any question of pettiness or arbitrariness in Dante’s selection of damned. It reminds us that Hell is not a place but a state; that man is damned or blessed in the creatures of his imagination as well as in men who have actually lived; and that Hell, though a state, is a state which can only be thought of, and perhaps only experienced, by the projection of sensory images; and that the resurrection of the body has perhaps a deeper meaning than