Work: “The Rise and Decline of Classical Physics” fromThe Evolution of Physics Field: rise and decline of classical physics Author: Albert Einstein and Leopold Infeld Title: THE DECLINE OF THE MECHANICAL VIEW The Two Electric Fluids. The following pages contain a dull report of some very simple experiments. The account will be boring not only because the description of experiments is uninteresting in comparison with their actual performance, but also because the meaning of the experiments does not become apparent until theory makes it so. Our purpose is to furnish a striking example of the role of theory in physics. 1. A metal bar is supported on a glass base, and each end of the bar is connected by means of a wire to an electroscope. What is an electroscope? It is a simple apparatus consisting essentially of two leaves of gold foil hanging from the end of a short piece of metal. This is enclosed in a glass jar or flask and the metal is in contact only with nonmetallic bodies, called insulators. In addition to the electroscope and metal bar we are equipped with a hard rubber rod and a piece of flannel. The experiment is performed as follows: we look to see whether the leaves hang close together, for this is their normal position. If by chance they do not, a touch of the finger on the metal rod will bring them together. These preliminary steps being taken, the rubber rod is rubbed vigorously with the flannel and brought into contact with the metal. The leaves separate at once! They remain apart even after the rod is removed. 2. We perform another experiment, using the same apparatus as before, again starting with the gold leaves hanging close together. This time we do not bring the rubbed rod into actual contact with the metal, but only near it. Again the leaves separate. But there is a difference! When the rod is taken away without having touched the metal, the leaves immediately fall back to their normal position instead of remaining separated. 3. Let us change the apparatus slightly for a third experiment. Suppose that the metal bar consists of two pieces, joined together. We rub the rubber rod with flannel and again bring it near the metal. The same phenomenon occurs, the leaves separate. But now let us divide the metal rod into its two separate parts and then take away the rubber rod. We notice that in this case the leaves remain apart, instead of falling back to their normal position as in the second experiment. It is difficult to evince enthusiastic interest in these simple and naïve experiments. In the Middle Ages their performer would probably have been condemned; to us they seem both dull and illogical. It would be very difficult to repeat them, after reading the account only once, without becoming confused. Some notion of the theory makes them understandable. We could say more: it is hardly possible to imagine such experiments performed as accidental play, without the pre-existence of more or less definite ideas about their meaning. We shall now point out the underlying ideas of a very simple and naïve theory which explains all the facts described. There exist two electric fluids, one called positive (+) and the other negative (−). They are somewhat like substance in the sense already explained, in that the amount can be enlarged or diminished, but the total in any isolated system is preserved. There is, however, an essential difference between this case and that of heat, matter or energy. We have two electrical substances. It is impossible here to use the previous analogy of money unless it is somehow generalized. A body is electrically neutral if the positive and negative electric fluids exactly cancel each other. A man has nothing, either because he really has nothing, or because the amount of money put aside in his safe is exactly equal to the sum of his debts. We can compare the debit and credit entries in his ledger to the two kinds of electric fluids. The next assumption of the theory is that two electric fluids of the same kind repel each other, while two of the opposite kind attract. This can be represented graphically in the following way: A final theoretical assumption is necessary: There are two kinds of bodies, those in which the fluids can move freely, called conductors, and those in which they cannot, called insulators. As is always true in such cases, this division is not to be taken too seriously. The ideal conductor or insulator is a fiction which can never be realized. Metals, the earth, the human body, are all examples of conductors, although not equally good. Glass, rubber, china, and the like are insulators. Air is only partially an insulator as everyone who has seen the described experiments knows. It is always a good excuse to ascribe the bad results of electrostatic experiments to the humidity of the air, which increases its conductivity. These theoretical assumptions are sufficient to explain the three experiments described. We shall discuss them once more, in the same order as before, but in the light of the theory of electric fluids. 1. The rubber rod, like all other bodies under normal conditions, is electrically neutral. It contains the two fluids, positive and negative, in equal amounts. By rubbing with flannel we separate them. This statement is pure convention, for it is the application of the terminology created by the theory to the description of the process of rubbing. The kind of electricity that the rod has in excess afterwards is called negative, a name which is certainly only a matter of convention. If the experiments had been performed with a glass rod rubbed with cat’s fur we should have had to call the excess positive, to conform with the accepted convention. To proceed with the experiment, we bring electric fluid to the metal conductor by touching it with the rubber. Here it moves freely, spreading over the whole metal including the gold leaves. Since the action of negative on negative is repulsion, the two leaves try to get as far from each other as possible and the result is the observed separation. The metal rests on glass or some other insulator so that the fluid remains on the conductor, as long as the conductivity of the air permits. We understand now why we have to touch the metal before beginning the experiment. In this case the metal, the human body, and the earth form one vast conductor, with the electric fluid so diluted that practically nothing remains on the electroscope. 2. This experiment begins just in the same way as the previous one. But instead of being allowed to touch the metal the rubber is now only brought near it. The two fluids in the conductor, being free to move, are separated, one attracted and the other repelled. They mix again when the rubber rod is removed, as fluids of opposite kinds attract each other. 3. Now we separate the metal into two parts and afterwards remove the rod. In this case the two fluids cannot mix, so that the gold leaves retain an excess of one electric fluid and remain apart. In the light of this simple theory all the facts mentioned here seem comprehensible. The same theory does more, enabling us to understand not only these, but many other facts in the realm of “electrostatics.” The aim of every theory is to guide us to new facts, suggest new experiments, and lead to the discovery of new phenomena and new laws. An example will make this clear. Imagine a change in the second experiment. Suppose I keep the rubber rod near the metal and at the same time touch the conductor with my finger. What will happen now? Theory answers: the repelled fluid (−) can now make its escape through my body, with the result that only one fluid remains, the positive. Only the leaves of the electroscope near the rubber rod will remain apart. An actual experiment confirms this prediction. The theory with which we are dealing is certainly naïve and inadequate from the point of view of modern physics. Nevertheless it is a good example showing the characteristic features of every physical theory. There are no eternal theories in science. It always happens that some of the facts predicted by a theory are disproved by experiment. Every theory has its period of gradual development and triumph, after which it may experience a rapid decline. The rise and fall of the substance theory of heat, already discussed here, is one of many possible examples. Others, more profound and important, will be discussed later. Nearly every great advance in science arises from a crisis in the old theory, through an endeavor to find a way out of the difficulties created. We must examine old ideas, old theories, although they belong to the past, for this is the only way to understand the importance