Work: White Nights Field: white nights Author: Fyodor Dostorvsky Title: THE THIRD NIGHT It had been a sad, drizzly day, without relief—just like my future senility. I am oppressed by strange thoughts and dark sensations; throngs of vague questions obsess me, but I have neither the strength nor the desire to cope with them. No, I cannot cope with it all! We won’t meet tonight. Last night, as we parted, clouds overcast the sky and a mist was rising. “Tomorrow will be a miserable day,” I said. She didn’t answer. She didn’t want to shed doubt on a day that shone before her bright and sunny. She didn’t want to cast a single cloud over it. “If it rains tomorrow,” she said, “I won’t come.” I didn’t think she’d notice that it was raining, but she must have, for she didn’t come. Last night was our third meeting, our third white night…. Yes, joy and happiness do make a person beautiful. His heart overflows with love, and he seems to try to pour that love into the heart of a fellow creature. He wants everything to laugh and to sparkle. And his joy is so contagious! There was so much tenderness, so much friendliness, for me in her heart last night. She was so full of solicitude for me and tried so hard to make me feel happy. Ah, a happy woman is always so full of seductive charm, but I… I took it at its face value; I imagined that… But how could I imagine anything of the sort. How could I be so blind, since I knew that all that had already been taken by someone else, that none of it could be for me; that even her niceness, her solicitude, her love—yes, her love for me—was nothing but happiness caused by a forthcoming meeting with another man, a wish on her part to impart a bit of that happiness to me. And when he didn’t turn up, when we’d waited in vain, she frowned, lost her composure, looked afraid. Her movements and her words were no longer light or playful or gay. And, strangely, she doubled the attentions she showered on me, as if she wanted instinctively to give me something she was longing for herself, something she feared she wouldn’t get. Nastenka had become so timid and fearful that I believe she grasped finally that I was in love with her and took pity on my poor love, for our own unhappiness makes us more sensitive to the unhappiness of others. When someone is unhappy, his sensitivity is not scattered; it becomes tense and concentrated. I had come to meet her tense with emotion, hardly able to wait for the moment of meeting. I never expected to feel what I felt, nor that it would end the way it did. She was beaming. She expected an answer from him. The answer was to be himself; he would come running in answer to her call. She’d come a whole hour before me. At first, every word made her burst into happy laughter. “Do you know why I’m so happy tonight?” she said. “Why I’m so pleased to see you? Why I like you so much?” “Yes?” I said, beginning to shiver. “I like you so much because you haven’t fallen in love with me. Someone else in your position might have started pestering me, become full of self-pity, moaned—but not you, you’re so nice!” She suddenly pressed my hand so hard that I started and almost cried out. She laughed. “Ah, you’re such a wonderful friend,” she said a moment later, seriously this time. “Yes, God sent you to me, really, I mean it. I can’t imagine what would have become of me without you. You’re so selfless, you’ve been so nice to me! When I’m married, we’ll see a lot of each other, we’ll be closer than brother and sister. I’ll love you almost as much as I love him….” Somehow I felt awfully sad, yet something resembling laughter stirred somewhere deep down inside me. “You’re overwrought,” I said. “You’re afraid he won’t come.” “Whatever are you talking about? If I weren’t so happy, your remarks and your lack of trust in me would make me cry. But it makes me think, after all… But I’ll think later; in the meantime, I admit you’re right. Yes, I’m not myself now, I’m all expectation, I feel a little too light…. But let’s leave this conversation about feelings—” At that second we heard steps and we saw a figure moving through the darkness. It was coming toward us. We both began to tremble. She just managed to suppress a cry. I let go of her hand and moved away discreetly. But it wasn’t him. “What are you afraid of? Why did you let go my hand?” She thrust her hand back into mine. “Well, what do you say, shall we meet him together? I want him to see how much we love each other.” “How much we love each other?” I repeated. “Ah, Nastenka,” I thought, “those words mean so many things! That sort of love sometimes freezes a heart and makes life seem unbearable. Your hand is cold—mine is burning. You’re blind. There certainly are times when happy people are unbearable—but I could never be angry with you!” But finally I couldn’t stand it. “Listen, Nastenka,” I said tensely, “to how I got through this day.” “What? Tell me! Why haven’t you said anything about it till now?” “First I went to carry out all your errands. I went to see your friends, left your letter there, then…then I went back home and turned in.” “And that’s all?” she laughed. “Almost all…” I made a great effort to control the idiotic tears that otherwise would have spurted from my eyes. “Then I woke up. About an hour before I was to meet you. But I felt I hadn’t slept at all. I didn’t know what was happening to me. It was as if time had stopped and one sensation, one feeling would remain in me from then on; as if one minute was going to stretch out into eternity; as if life would stop and stand still for me. I was going to tell you all this as soon as we met. When I woke up, I was under the impression that some sweet melody, heard somewhere long ago and since forgotten, had come back to me now, that for all these years, I’d been searching for it, longing for it, but only now—” “My God, what’s this all about?” Nastenka interrupted me. “I don’t understand a thing you’re saying.” “I was trying, Nastenka, to make you understand the strange feeling—” I started in a pitiful voice in which there was still a note of hope, even if a very faint one. “Stop it! That’s enough, stop it,” she repeated quickly. It hadn’t taken her long to guess, the sly girl! She suddenly became very talkative, gay, and full of jokes. Laughing, she took my arm, trying to make me laugh, too. Every awkward, embarrassed word of mine set off such long peals of silvery laughter that I was on the point of losing my temper. Then she became flirtatious. “You see,” she began, “I’m a bit offended with you for not falling in love with me. People don’t always make sense, remember! But still, Mr. Unmovable, you can’t avoid complimenting me for being so straightforward. Why, I tell you everything, however inane, that crosses my mind.” “Wait, I believe that’s eleven striking,” I said. The even booming had started in a distant clock tower. She stopped laughing and counted. “Yes, eleven,” she said in a weak, hesitant voice. I was sorry that I had alarmed her and had made her count the strokes. I cursed myself for my spitefulness. I felt miserable for her, and didn’t know how to make up for my nastiness. I tried to cheer her up, to find good reasons for his failure to turn up, to argue, prove, plead. She was, of course, very easy to convince on that subject, only too delighted to clutch at any excuse for him that I could think up. “It’s really funny,” I was saying heatedly, admiring the persuasive power of my own arguments, “your assurance that he’d be here led me to accept it as a fact and even lose my sense of time. Actually, he couldn’t possibly have made it. Just think, he’s hardly had time to receive the letter. Now suppose he couldn’t come tonight and wrote a note to that effect. It couldn’t get to your friends’ before tomorrow, could it? I’ll go and see first thing tomorrow morning and let you know right away. Now there are hundreds of other possibilities; for instance, he may not have been at home when the letter arrived, and maybe he hasn’t read it to this very moment…. Anything could’ve happened.” “Yes, of course,”