continue..
Italy. There’s something inexpressibly moving in our Petersburg countryside when, with the arrival of spring, it suddenly reveals itself in all its might and with all its God-given gifts; when it dresses up, adorns itself with bright, multicolored flowers…. It makes me think of a weak, frail, sickly young girl, usually regarded with pity, sometimes with compassionate love, and sometimes not even noticed, who for one moment, as if by accident, suddenly becomes immensely beautiful; and, struck and charmed, you can’t help wondering what force could have lighted the flame in those sad, dreamy eyes. What has caused the blood to rush to those pale, sunken cheeks? What has brought this passion to her delicate features? Why does her bosom heave like that? What has so suddenly communicated vigor, life, and beauty to the poor girl’s face; given it that radiant smile; produced that glittering, sparkling laughter? You look around, you try to guess. But then it’s all gone, and the next day perhaps, you’ll meet her usual pensive, abstract gaze again, recognize her pale face and the timid humility of her movements; you’ll even detect remorse and signs of some deadening anguish and shame over that momentary exaltation…. And you’re sorry that the ephemeral beauty has faded so rapidly, so irretrievably, that it flashed so deceptively and pointlessly before your eyes—you’re sorry, for you didn’t even have time to fall in love with her…. But, even so, the night was better than the day! This is what happened. It was very late when I got back into the city. As I approached the house I live in, it struck ten. I was walking along the embankment; at that hour there was no one around, for I live in a remote part of town. I sang as I walked, for when I’m happy, I always hum something—as does every happy, friendless man who has no one with whom to share his happiness. Then suddenly the most unexpected thing happened to me. I saw a woman leaning against the railing along the embankment. She appeared to be gazing attentively at the murky water. She wore a ravishing little yellow hat and an elegant black cape. “She must be young and dark-haired,” I decided. I don’t think she heard my footsteps, and she didn’t even stir when I passed her, holding my breath, my heart beating wildly. “Strange,” I thought, “she must be quite lost in thought—” Suddenly I stopped dead. Stifled sobs reached my ears. Yes, that was it—she was crying. Again I heard the girl trying to catch her breath. Ah, God! My heart contracted with pity, and shy though I am with women, I retraced my steps and walked up to her. I’m sure I’d have exclaimed “Madame!” had I not been so acutely aware that this form of address has already been used so often in Russian novels with a high-society background. That was all that stopped me. But while I was searching for an alternative approach, the girl recovered, turned her head, glanced at me, looked away, and darted off along the embankment. I followed her. She must have realized, for she turned her back to the water, crossed the street, and went along the opposite sidewalk. I didn’t dare follow her across the street. My heart was quivering like that of a bird held in a man’s hand. Then something came to my assistance. I saw a man walking on the other side of the street, not far from the girl. He wore a frock coat, and seemed to have reached an age of respectability, although there was nothing respectable about his gait. He was staggering and stumbling along, guiding himself by leaning against the walls. Now the girl was moving lightly and apprehensively, as girls do at night when they don’t wish strange men to offer to see them home; the staggering gentleman never would have caught up with her if he hadn’t changed his tactics (for which I thank my lucky stars). But suddenly, without uttering a word, the man set off at a gallop. She darted ahead with quickened, fearful steps, but the swaying figure kept gaining on her. He came closer and closer, then he caught up with her. The girl let out a cry, and—I thank my lucky stars again for placing my excellent knobby walking stick in my right hand. In no time, I was on the opposite sidewalk; in no time, the uninvited gentleman made a practical appraisal of the situation, took into consideration the unanswerable argument in my hand, slowed down, and fell back. And only when he felt there was a safe distance between us did he voice his indignation in no uncertain terms. But his words hardly reached us. “If,” I said to the girl, “you will allow me to take your arm, that man won’t dare annoy you again.” Silently she allowed me. Her hand was still trembling from fear and her earlier emotions. Ah, what blessings I wished at that moment upon the unwelcome gentleman! I squinted at her discreetly. She was terribly pretty. Her hair was dark, just as I’d guessed. Tears glistened on her black eyelashes, whether from her recent fright or from her sorrow, I didn’t know, but a smile was already sparkling on her lips. She glanced at me out of the corner of her eye, blushed, and looked down. “Now, you see, you shouldn’t have spurned me like that. Nothing would’ve happened if I’d been at your side.” “But I didn’t know you; I thought you too…” “Do you feel you know me now?” “A little. For instance, I know you’re trembling. Tell me why.” “Ah, you’ve guessed right from the start!” I said, delighted that she should turn out to be so clever—never a drawback in a woman, as long as she’s pretty. “Yes, you’ve seen through me straight away. I’m afraid of women, and it’s that fear that makes me tremble, just as it made you tremble a few moments ago when that gentleman frightened you. I’m frightened now, all right. It’s like a dream, although I’ve never actually dreamed that I’d be talking like this to a woman.” “Really?” “Yes. And if you feel my arm tremble, it’s because it has never yet been held by a pretty hand like yours. I’m quite unused to being with women. In fact, I’ve never got used to them. I live all alone. I don’t even know how to talk to women. For instance, I don’t know if I haven’t said something stupid to you. Please, tell me frankly—I promise I won’t be offended.” “No, no, on the contrary. And since you want me to be frank, let me tell you that women like your sort of shyness; I’ll even tell you that I like it too, and I won’t ask you to leave me until we’re at my doorstep.” “If you go on saying things like that,” I said, out of breath with enthusiasm, “I’ll lose my shyness and, along with it, my advantage….” “Advantage? Advantage to what end? Ah, now you’ve said something I don’t like.” “I am sorry, it just slipped off my tongue. You can’t really expect that, at such a moment, I shouldn’t wish that…” “What? Wish that I should like you?” “Yes, that’s it. But please, try to understand: I’m twenty-six already and I’ve never known anyone closely. So how can I be expected to be good at speaking to people? How can I say things well and to the point? Besides, isn’t it better for you when everything is out in the open? For I don’t know how to be silent when my heart is talking. Well, what’s the difference? But believe me, I’ve never, never spoken to any woman. Never. I’ve never known one. I’ve only gone around dreaming that one day I might meet someone. If you only knew how many times I’ve fallen in love that way….” “But how’s that, who did you fall in love with?” “Why, no one in particular, just with the ideal woman, the one I’d dreamed of. I can dream up whole novels, you know. Oh, you really have no idea about me! Of course, as you can well imagine, I have come across two or three women in my time. But what sort of women were they? They were such housewives that—But now you’ll laugh when I tell you that I planned for a long time to address some aristocratic lady in the street. When she was alone, of course. Talk to her shyly, respectfully, passionately; tell her that I was perishing in my loneliness; beseech her not to send me away; say that it was impossible for me to get to know any other woman; persuade her that it was even the duty of a woman not to spurn the timid approach of one so unhappy; convince her that, finally, all I wanted from her was a few understanding, sisterly words, and