continue..
constitutes one of the most interesting chapters in the history of culture. When the Arabs of the tenth century adopted the Indian numeration, they translated the Indian sunya by their own, sifr, which meant “empty” in Arabic. When the Indo-Arabic numeration was first introduced into Italy, sifr was latinized into zephirum. This happened at the beginning of the thirteenth century, and in the course of the next hundred years the word underwent a series of changes which culminated in the Italian zero. About the same time Jordanus Nemerarius was introducing the Arabic system into Germany. He kept the Arabic word, changing it slightly to cifra. That for some time in the learned circles of Europe the word cifra and its derivatives denoted zero is shown by the fact that the great Gauss, the last of the mathematicians of the nineteenth century who wrote in Latin, still used cifra in this sense. In the English language the word cifra has become cipher and has retained its original meaning of zero. The attitude of the common people toward this new numeration is reflected in the fact that soon after its introduction into Europe, the word cifra was used as a secret sign; but this connotation was altogether lost in the succeeding centuries. The verb decipher remains as a monument of these early days. The next stage in this development saw the new art of reckoning spread more widely. It is significant that the essential part played by zero in this new system did not escape the notice of the masses. Indeed, they identified the whole system with its most striking feature, the cifra, and this explains how this word in its different forms, ziffer, chiffre, etc., came to receive the meaning of numeral, which it has in Europe today. This double meaning, the popular cifra standing for numeral and the cifra of the learned signifying zero, caused considerable confusion. In vain did scholars attempt to revive the original meaning of the word: the popular meaning had taken deep root. The learned had to yield to popular usage, and the matter was eventually settled by adopting the Italian zero in the sense in which it is used today. The same interest attaches to the word algorithm. As the term is used today, it applies to any mathematical procedure consisting of an indefinite number of steps, each step applying to the result of the one preced-ing it. But between the tenth and fifteenth centuries algorithm was synonymous with positional numeration. We now know that the word is merely a corruption of Al Kworesmi, the name of the Arabian mathematician of the ninth century whose book (in Latin translation) was the first work on this subject to reach Western Europe. 11. Today, when positional numeration has become a part of our daily life, it seems that the superiority of this method, the compactness of its notation, the ease and elegance it introduced in calculations, should have assured the rapid and sweeping acceptance of it. In reality, the transition, far from being immediate, extended over long centuries. The struggle between the Abacists, who defended the old traditions, and the Algorists, who advocated the reform, lasted from the eleventh to the fifteenth century and went through all the usual stages of obscurantism and reaction. In some places Arabic numerals were banned from official documents; in others, the art was prohibited altogether. And, as usual, prohibition did not succeed in abolishing, but merely served to spread bootlegging, ample evidence of which is found in the thirteenth-century archives of Italy, where, it appears, merchants were using the Arabic numerals as a sort of secret code. Yet, for a while reaction succeeded in arresting the progress and in hampering the development of the new system. Indeed, little of essential value or of lasting influence was contributed to the art of reckoning in these transition centuries. Only the outward appearance of the numerals went through a series of changes; not, however, from any desire for improvement, but because the manuals of these days were handwritten. In fact, the numerals did not assume a stable form until the introduction of printing. It can be added parenthetically that so great was the stabilizing influence of printing that the numerals of today have essentially the same appearance as those of the fifteenth century. 12. As to the final victory of the Algorists, no definite date can be set. We do know that at the beginning of the sixteenth century the supremacy of the new numeration was incontestable. Since then progress was unhampered, so that in the course of the next hundred years all the rules of operations, both on integers and on common and decimal fractions, reached practically the same scope and form in which they are taught today in our schools. Another century, and the Abacists and all they stood for were so completely forgotten that various peoples of Europe began each to regard the positional numeration as its own national achievement. So, for instance, early in the nineteenth century we find that Arabic numerals were called in Germany Deutsche with a view to differentiating them from the Roman, which were recognized as of foreign origin. As to the abacus itself, no traces of it are found in Western Europe during the eighteenth century. Its reappearance early in the nineteenth century occurred under very curious circumstances. The mathematician Poncelet, a general under Napoleon, was captured in the Russian campaign and spent many years in Russia as a prisoner of war. Upon returning to France he brought, among other curios, a Russian abacus. For many years to come, this importation of Poncelet’s was regarded as a great curiosity of “barbaric” origin. Such examples of national amnesia abound in the history of culture. How many educated people even today know that only four hundred years ago finger counting was the average man’s only means of calculating, while the counting board was accessible only to the professional calculators of the time? 13. Conceived in all probability as the symbol for an empty column on a counting board, the Indian sunya was destined to become the turning point in a development without which the progress of modern science, industry, or commerce is inconceivable. And the influence of this great discovery was by no means confined to arithmetic. By paving the way to a generalized number concept, it played just as fundamental a role in practically every branch of mathematics. In the history of culture the discovery of zero will always stand out as one of the greatest single achievements of the human race. A great discovery! Yes. But, like so many other early discoveries, which have profoundly affected the life of the race—not the reward of painstaking research, but a gift from blind chance. The foregoing two selections consist of Chapters I and II from Dantzig’s number: the language of science .