continue..
the row of heads suddenly disappeared, and the sound of pens travelling at a furious rate over paper, immediately succeeded. A sudden ring at the bell which hung in the office summoned Mr. Jackson to the apartment of Fogg, from whence he came back to say that he (Fogg) was ready to see Mr. Pickwick if he would step upstairs. Upstairs Mr. Pickwick did step accordingly, leaving Sam Weller below. The room door of the one-pair back bore inscribed in legible characters the imposing words “Mr. Fogg”; and, having tapped thereat, and been desired to come in, Jackson ushered Mr. Pickwick into the presence. “Is Mr. Dodson in?” inquired Mr. Fogg. “Just come in, sir,” replied Jackson. “Ask him to step here.” “Yes, sir.” Exit Jackson. “Take a seat, sir,” said Fogg; “there is the paper, sir; my partner will be here directly, and we can converse about this matter, sir.” Mr. Pickwick took a seat and the paper, but instead of reading the latter, peeped over the top of it, and took a survey of the man of business, who was an elderly, pimply-faced, vegetable-diet sort of man, in a black coat, dark-mixture trousers, and small black gaiters; a kind of being who seemed to be an essential part of the desk at which he was writing, and to have as much thought or sentiment. After a few minutes’ silence, Mr. Dodson, a plump, portly, stern-looking man, with a loud voice, appeared; and the conversation commenced. “This is Mr. Pickwick,” said Fogg. “Ah! You are the defendant, sir, in Bardell and Pickwick?” said Dodson. “I am, sir,” replied Mr. Pickwick. “Well, sir,” said Dodson, “and what do you propose?” “Ah!” said Fogg, thrusting his hands into his trouser pockets, and throwing himself back in his chair, “what do you propose, Mr. Pickwick?” “Hush, Fogg,” said Dodson, “let me hear what Mr. Pickwick has to say.” “I came, gentlemen,” said Mr. Pickwick, gazing placidly on the two partners, “I came here, gentlemen, to express the surprise with which I received your letter of the other day, and to inquire what grounds of action you can have against me.” “Grounds of—” Fogg had ejaculated this much, when he was stopped by Dodson. “Mr. Fogg,” said Dodson, “I am going to speak.” “I beg your pardon, Mr. Dodson,” said Fogg. “For the grounds of action, sir,” continued Dodson, with moral elevation in his air, “you will consult your own conscience and your own feelings. We, sir, we, are guided entirely by the statement of our client. That statement, sir, may be true, or it may be false; it may be credible, or it may be incredible; but if it be true, and if it be credible, I do not hesitate to say, sir, that our grounds of action, sir, are strong, and not to be shaken. You may be an unfortunate man, sir, or you may be a designing one; but if I were called upon, as a juryman upon my oath, sir, to express an opinion of your conduct, sir, I do not hesitate to assert that I should have but one opinion about it.” Here Dodson drew himself up, with an air of offended virtue, and looked at Fogg, who thrust his hands further in his pockets and, nodding his head sagely, said, in a tone of the fullest concurrence, “Most certainly.” “Well, sir,” said Mr. Pickwick, with considerable pain depicted in his countenance, “you will permit me to assure you that I am a most unfortunate man, so far as this case is concerned.” “I hope you are, sir,” replied Dodson; “I trust you may be, sir. If you are really innocent of what is laid to your charge, you are more unfortunate than I had believed any man could possibly be. What do you say, Mr. Fogg?” “I say precisely what you say,” replied Fogg, with a smile of incredulity. “The writ, sir, which commences the action,” continued Dodson, “was issued regularly. Mr. Fogg, where is the praecipe book?” “Here it is,” said Fogg, handing over a square book with a parchment cover. “Here is the entry,” resumed Dodson. “‘Middlesex, Capias Martha Bar dell, widow, v. Samuel Pickwick. Damages, £1,500. Dodson and Fogg for the plaintiff, Aug. 28, 1830.’ All regular, sir; perfectly.” Dodson coughed and looked at Fogg, who said, “Perfectly,” also. And then they both looked at Mr. Pickwick. “I am to understand, then,” said Mr. Pickwick, “that it really is your intention to proceed with this action?” “Understand, sir? That you certainly may,” replied Dodson, with something as near a smile as his importance would allow. “And that the damages are actually laid at fifteen hundred pounds?” said Mr. Pickwick. “To which understanding you may add my assurance that if we could have prevailed upon our client, they would have been laid at treble the amount, sir,” replied Dodson. “I believe Mrs. Bardell specially said, however,” observed Fogg, glancing at Dodson, “that she would not compromise for a farthing less.” “Unquestionably,” replied Dodson, sternly. For the action was only just begun; and it wouldn’t have done to let Mr. Pickwick compromise it then, even if he had been so disposed. “As you offer no terms, sir,” said Dodson, displaying a slip of parchment in his right hand, and affectionately pressing a paper copy of it on Mr. Pickwick with his left, “I had better serve you with a copy of this writ, sir. Here is the original, sir.” “Very well, gentlemen, very well,” said Mr. Pickwick, rising in person and wrath at the same time; “you shall hear from my solicitor, gentlemen.” “We shall be very happy to do so,” said Fogg, rubbing his hands. “Very,” said Dodson, opening the door. “And before I go, gentlemen,” said the excited Mr. Pickwick, turning round on the landing, “permit me to say, that of all the disgraceful and rascally proceedings—” “Stay, sir, stay,” interposed Dodson, with great politeness. “Mr. Jackson! Mr. Wicks!” “Sir,” said the two clerks, appearing at the bottom of the stairs. “I merely want you to hear what this gentleman says,” replied Dodson. “Pray, go on, sir—disgraceful and rascally proceedings, I think you said?” “I did,” said Mr. Pickwick, thoroughly roused. “I said, sir, that of all the disgraceful and rascally proceedings that ever were attempted, this is the most so. I repeat it, sir.” “You hear that, Mr. Wicks?” said Dodson. “You won’t forget these expressions, Mr. Jackson?” said Fogg. “Perhaps you would like to call us swindlers, sir,” said Dodson. “Pray do, sir, if you feel disposed; now pray do, sir.” “I do,” said Mr. Pickwick. “You are swindlers.” “Very good,” said Dodson. “You can hear down there, I hope, Mr. Wicks?” “Oh yes, sir,” said Wicks. “You had better come up a step or two higher, if you can’t,” added Mr. Fogg. “Go on, sir; do go on. You had better call us thieves, sir; or perhaps you would like to assault one of us. Pray do it, sir, if you would; we will not make the smallest resistance. Pray do it, sir.” As Fogg put himself very temptingly within the reach of Mr. Pickwick’s clenched fist, there is little doubt that that gentleman would have complied with his earnest entreaty, but for the interposition of Sam, who, hearing the dispute, emerged from the office, mounted the stairs, and seized his master by the arm. “You just come avay,” said Mr. Weller. “Battledore and shuttlecock’s a wery good game, vhen you an’t the shuttlecock and two lawyers the battledores, in which case it gets too excitin’ to be pleasant. Come avay, sir. If you want to ease your mind by blowing up somebody, come out into the court and blow up me; but it’s rayther too expensive work to be carried on here.” And without the slightest ceremony, Mr. Weller hauled his master down the stairs, and down the court, and having safely deposited him in Cornhill, fell behind, prepared to follow whithersoever he should lead. [Mr. Pickwick, after some adventures in the country, is still very much in the dark, and sends Sam to reconnoiter.] …Mr. Pickwick resolved on immediately returning to London, with the view of becoming acquainted with the proceedings which had been taken against him, in the meantime, by Messrs. Dodson and Fogg. Acting upon this resolution with all the energy and decision of his character, he mounted to the back seat of the first coach which left Ipswich in the morning…; and accompanied by his three friends, and Mr. Samuel Weller, arrived in the metropolis, in perfect health and safety, the same evening. Here, the friends, for a short time, separated. Messrs. Tupman, Winkle, and Snodgrass repaired to their several homes to make such preparations as might be requisite for their forthcoming visit to Dingley Dell; and Mr. Pickwick and Sam took up their present abode in very good, old-fashioned, and comfortable quarters: to wit, the George and Vulture Tavern and Hotel, George Yard, Lombard Street.