Work: Numerical Laws and the Use of Mathematics in Science Field: numerical laws and the use of mathematics in science Author: Norman Robert Campbell Title: MATHEMATICAL THEORIES We have now examined two of the applications of mathematics to science. Both of them depend on the fact that relations which appeal to the sense of the mathematician by their neatness and simplicity are found to be important in the external world of experiment. The relations between numerals which he suggests are found to occur in numerical laws, and the assumptions which are suggested by his arguments are found to be true. We have finally to notice a yet more striking example of the same fact, and one which is much more difficult to explain to the layman. This last application is in formulating theories…. A theory, to be valuable, must have two features. It must be such that laws can be predicted from it and such that it explains these laws by introducing some analogy based on laws more familiar than those to be explained. In recent developments of physics, theories have been developed which conform to the first of these conditions but not to the second. In place of the analogy with familiar laws, there appears the new principle of mathematical simplicity. These theories explain the laws, as do the older theories, by replacing less acceptable by more acceptable ideas; but the greater acceptability of the ideas introduced by the theories is not derived from an analogy with familiar laws, but simply from the strong appeal they make to the mathematician’s sense of form. I do not feel confident that I can explain the matter further to those who have not some knowledge of both physics and mathematics, but I must try. The laws on the analogy with which theories of the older type are based were often (in physics, usually) numerical laws, such laws for example as that of the falling body. Now numerical laws, since they involve mathematical relations, are usually expressed, not in words, but in the symbols in which, as every one knows, mathematicians express their ideas and their arguments. I have been careful to avoid these symbols; until this page there is hardly an “x” or a “y” in the book. And I have done so because experience shows that they frighten people; they make them think that something very difficult is involved. But really, of course, symbols make things easier; it is conceivable that some superhuman intellect might be able to study mathematics, and even to advance it, expressing all his thoughts in words. Actually, the wonderful symbolism mathematics has invented makes such efforts unnecessary; [symbols] make the processes of reasoning quite easy to follow. They are actually inseparable from mathematics; they make exceedingly difficult arguments easy to follow by means of simple rules for juggling with these symbols—interchanging their order, replacing one by another, and so on. The consequence is that the expert mathematician has a sense about symbols, as symbols; he looks at a page covered with what, to anyone else, are unintelligible scrawls of ink, and he immediately realizes whether the argument expressed by them is such as is likely to satisfy his sense of form; whether the argument will be “neat” and the results “pretty.” (I can’t tell you what those terms mean, any more than I can tell you what I mean when I say that a picture is beautiful.) Now sometimes, but not always, simple folk can understand what he means; let me try an example. Suppose you found a page with the following marks on it—never mind if they mean anything: I think you would see that the set of symbols on the right side are “prettier” in some sense than those on the left; they are more symmetrical. Well, the great physicist James Clerk Maxwell, about 1870, thought so too; and by substituting the symbols on the right side for those on the left, he founded modern physics, and, among other practical results, made wireless telegraphy possible. It sounds incredible; and I must try to explain a little more. The symbols on the left side represent two well-known electrical laws: Ampère’s Law and Faraday’s Law; or rather a theory suggested by an analogy with those laws. The symbols i, j, k represent in those laws an electric current. For these symbols Maxwell substituted that substitution was roughly equivalent to saying that an electric current was related to the things represented by X, Y, Z, t (never mind what they are) in a way nobody had ever thought of before; it was equivalent to saying that so long as X, Y, Z, t were related in a certain way, there might be an electric current in circumstances in which nobody had believed that an electric current could flow. As a matter of fact, such a current would be one flowing in an absolutely empty space without any material conductor along which it might flow, and such a current was previously thought to be impossible. But Maxwell’s feeling for symbolism suggested to him that there might be such a current, and when he worked out the consequences of supposing that there were such currents (not currents perceptible in the ordinary way, but theoretical currents, as molecules are theoretical hard particles), he arrived at the unexpected result that an alteration in an electric current in one place would be reproduced at another far distant from it by waves travelling from one to the other through absolutely empty space between. Hertz actually produced and detected such waves; and Marconi made them a commercial article. That is the best attempt I can make at explaining the matter. It is one more illustration of the marvellous power of pure thought, aiming only at the satisfaction of intellectual desires, to control the external world. Since Maxwell’s time, there have been many equally wonderful theories, the form of which is suggested by nothing but the mathematician’s sense for symbols. The latest are those of Sommerfeld, based [on] the ideas of Niels Bohr, and of Einstein. Every one has heard of the latter, but the former (which concerns the constitution of the atom) is quite as marvellous. But of these I could not give, even if space allowed, even such an explanation as I have attempted for Maxwell’s. And the reason is this: A theory by itself means nothing experimental;…it is only when something is deduced from it that it is brought within the range of our material senses. Now in Maxwell’s theory, the symbols, in the alteration of which the characteristic feature of the theory depends, are retained through the deduction and appear in the law which is compared with experiment. Accordingly it is possible to give some idea of what these symbols mean in terms of things experimentally observed. But in Sommerfeld’s or Einstein’s theory the symbols, which are necessarily involved in the assumption which differentiates their theories from others, disappear during the deduction; they leave a mark on the other symbols which remain and alter the relation between them; but the symbols on the relations of which the whole theory hangs do not appear at all in any law deduced from the theory. It is quite impossible to give any idea of what they mean in terms of experiment. Probably some of my readers will have read the very interesting and ingenious attempts to “explain Einstein” which have been published, and will feel that they really have a grasp of the matter. Personally I doubt it; the only way to understand what Einstein did is to look at the symbols in which his theory must ultimately be expressed and to realize that it was reasons of symbolic form, and such reasons alone, which led him to arrange the symbols in the way he did and in no other. But now I have waded into such deep water that it is time to retrace my steps and return to the safe shore of the affairs of practical life. The foregoing two selections are Chapters VI & VII from Campbell’s what is science ?