continue..
the earth’s attracting influence is the sole cause dominating the movement of the moon, can be justified, the number at the distance of the moon would be 1/3600 x, just as x is sixteen at the surface of the earth. We therefore have to calculate this number 1/3600 x for the moon, in the same way as 16 is the calculated number for the stone. When it has been found for the moon, we at once have the value of x by a simple operation; and this value of x is as crucial for the moon’s motion under our hypothesis as is the number 16 for the falling stone. If this crucial number x for the moon is inferred from the calculation to be the same as the crucial number 16 for the falling stone, the hypothesis concerning the attracting influence of the earth is so far justified. If it is not, the moon sails on, serenely unexplained. The crucial number for the moon must be found. Here, Newton was at the crisis of his investigation. He had his facts: there were the established laws, expressing accumulations of observations: there were the old measurements in the accepted units, the foot as the precise unit for distance in the case of the falling stone, the radius of the earth to be expressed in miles as a less precise unit in estimating the distance of the moon. Newton was now to test his theory in the furnace of fact. Everything depended upon the crucial number x: would it come out, for the moon, the same as it was for the stone, the critical sixteen? When this crucial number x first emerged from Newton’s calculations about the moon, it turned out to amount to something very slightly less than fourteen—let us call it fourteen, as approximately as the critical sixteen. Certainly the x had been found to be the number sixteen for the stone, which was as surely sixteen as human observation could make it. The theory was not established as a working hypothesis. Unless unknown and apparently undiscoverable errors had crept in, of such a kind as to vitiate the calculation, the theory could not be maintained. Something must be wrong somewhere: hardly imaginable in the facts or in the data; perhaps—a reluctant perhaps—in the assumption that the earth was the attracting influence upon the stone and the moon. At that stage there was nothing to be done by a mind and a temperament such as were Newton’s: he kept silence, consigned his soul not to perdition but to patience, and proceeded to ponder over other riddles of the physical universe. Now what is the secret of the situation? It is implied in what has already been said, as though it were a clue in a crossword puzzle. The calculations involved, through the moon’s distance, an estimate of the radius of the earth in miles; and in Newton’s day the mile, a geographical or nautical mile, was the sixtieth part of a degree. The calculations involved, through the distances traversed by the stone, the adoption of the foot as the unit. The two different units of length had to be brought into relation. We, of course, take 5,280 feet as equivalent to a mile; so did Newton. But that mile of 5,280 feet is not a geographical mile, the sixtieth part of a degree of latitude; the geographical mile survives solely in one usage, the maritime knot of 6,080 feet, and Newton did not know the fact. A correct estimate had, it is true, been published some thirty years earlier by a London schoolmaster based upon his own observations during a holiday tramp from London to York; but in the Stuart days of the first Charles, England was more concerned with political turmoil than with a pedagogue’s estimate of a mile, and the schoolmaster’s contribution to knowledge remained unnoticed and unknown. Some thirteen years passed in silence for Newton. In 1679 a friend told him of a recent French research in geodesy which gave a corrected estimate of the length of a degree of latitude: still, of course, the sixty geographical miles, but a little over sixty-nine of the customary civic miles of 5,280 feet. Thus one datum in Newton’s calculation had been wrong: he had used a wrong number, 60, instead of a right number, 69. In the light of this new knowledge Newton returned to his old calculations: the use of the more accurate measure of the radius of the earth brought out the crucial number x for the moon to be in exact and complete agreement with the crucial number 16 for a falling stone. His hypothesis concerning the attracting influence of the earth was verified. It became a trustworthy working hypothesis which, in due course of its development, though then he knew it not, was to achieve a revolution in thought as regards the human knowledge of the physical cosmos. But his mathematical triumph was only the beginning of new mathematical work. Suddenly there loomed before him a portentous difficulty. All his calculations had treated the moon, the earth, the sun, as points—points which, in Euclid’s definition familiar to Newton, had no parts and no magnitude: an earth of no magnitude; a sun of no magnitude; truly portentous assumptions! To Newton’s mind a fresh difficulty was only a fresh problem to be solved: and, here, he made another mathematical discovery which was of supreme importance for his theory. The moon, the earth, the sun, the planets, all of them round bodies, are very nearly spherical in shape; and Newton’s fresh discovery was that the complete attraction of a sphere on an outside body was the same, in all respects, as if the whole of the matter were condensed at the centre. In fact, his mathematics showed that he could regard the moon, the earth, the sun, as attracting points. The difficulty disappeared: the theory could stand. Now he could go forward, to test the theory further by further extension: the result was his theory of universal gravitation according to which every particle of matter in the universe attracts every other particle according to a definite law: the attraction was measured by dividing one fixed number by a number which represented the square of the distance between the attracting particles. He worked out the theory in detail, under this law; the calculated results everywhere agreed with the observed phenomena; and the result was the publication, in 1687, of his Mathe matical Principles of Natural Philosophy, one of the great books of the world. It was an achievement made through mathematics by a mathematician. It has been confirmed and amplified since Newton’s day by generations of mathematicians of all the ages and all climes: by means of it, and still using their mathematics, they have made predictions that are daily verified in the movement of the planets; they have predicted the return of comets, they discovered a new planet, and, passing from fact as commonplace as the creation of the Nautical Almanac to the shadowy realms of high speculation, they measure the bounds of the universe, assign a limit in the past to its evolution from chaos, nay, they will even assign a limit to its future—a very remote limit, happily for our sense of ease—when it may subside into an exhausted extinction. Personally, I prefer fact to speculation. Behind my account of the emergence of the theory of universal gravitation, there stands a purpose of warning rather than edification. Often in recent years you will have heard the name of Einstein: the journals and newspapers appeared to palpitate with excitement over his discovery, which was very real and of real importance: but there always was, and there remains, a grave dearth of comprehensible explanation as to the gist of his discovery. The writers found the word relativity: it used to bear a philosophical significance mainly connected with a doctrine that existence and observation are not independent of the living and observing mind. The association with the physical universe was rather nebulous in explanation: that mattered little; was not Einstein’s important (but dimly understood) discovery connected with relativity? So, imitating the image-makers at Ephesus in the days of the apostle Paul, the expositors proclaimed that “Great is relativity.” Here are the facts, so far as they are concerned with the theory of gravitation. That theory of gravitation was found to embrace all astronomical observations. By the assumption of that theory as a working basis, Halley in 1706 had predicted the periodic return of a particular comet: it duly verified the prediction in 1758, in 1835, in 1910; and its next coming is due only fifty-eight years hence. By the assumption of that theory Adams and Leverrier, independently, through a vast mathematical calculation applied to some seeming irregularities of the planet Uranus, discovered the existence of a still more distant planet Neptune, never observed before the discovery made in their studies. The mathematical genius of Laplace had set the phenomena of