Work: The Cherry Orchard Field: cherry orchard Author: Anton Chekhov Title: ACT II A meadow. An old, long-abandoned, lopsided little chapel; near it, a well, large slabs, which had apparently once served as tombstones, and an old bench. In the background, the road to the Gayev estate. To one side poplars loom darkly, where the cherry orchard begins. In the distance a row of telegraph poles, and far off, on the hori zon, the faint outline of a large city which is seen only in fine, clear weather. The sun will soon be setting. charlotta , yasha , and dunyasha are seated on the bench . yepihodov stands near and plays a guitar . All are pensive. charlotta wears an old peaked cap . She has taken a gun from her shoulder and is straightening the buckle on the strap. Charlotta (musingly). I haven’t a real passport, I don’t know how old I am, and I always feel that I am very young. When I was a little girl, my father and mother used to go from fair to fair and give performances, very good ones. And I used to do the salto mortale, and all sorts of other tricks. And when Papa and Mamma died, a German lady adopted me and began to educate me. Very good. I grew up and became a governess. But where I come from and who I am, I don’t know…. Who were my parents? Perhaps they weren’t even married…. I don’t know…. (Takes a cucumber out of her pocket and eats it.) I don’t know a thing. (Pause.) One wants so much to talk, and there isn’t anyone to talk to…. I haven’t anybody. Yepihodov (plays the guitar and sings). “What care I for the jarring world? What’s friend or foe to me?…” How agreeable it is to play the mandolin. Dunyasha. That’s a guitar, not a mandolin. (Looks in a hand mirror and powders her face.) Yepihodov. To a madman in love it’s a mandolin. (Sings) “Would that the heart were warmed by the fire of mutual love!” (yasha joins in.) Charlotta. How abominably these people sing. Pfui! Like jackals! Dunyasha (to yasha). How wonderful it must be though to have stayed abroad! Yasha. Ah, yes, of course, I cannot but agree with you there. (Yawns and lights a cigar.) Yepihodov. Naturally. Abroad, everything has long since achieved full perplexion. Yasha. That goes without saying. Yepihodov. I’m a cultivated man, I read all kinds of remarkable books. And yet I can never make out what direction I should take, what it is that I want, properly speaking. Should I live, or should I shoot myself, properly speaking? Nevertheless, I always carry a revolver about me…. Here it is…(Shows revolver). Charlotta. I’ve finished. I’m going. (Puts the gun over her shoulder.) You are a very clever man, Yepihodov, and a very terrible one; women must be crazy about you. Br-r-r! (Starts to go.) These clever men are all so stupid; there’s no one for me to talk to…always alone, alone, I haven’t a soul…and who I am, and why I am, nobody knows. (Exits unhurriedly.) Yepihodov. Properly speaking and letting other subjects alone, I must say regarding myself, among other things, that fate treats me mercilessly, like a storm treats a small boat. If I am mistaken, let us say, why then do I wake up this morning, and there on my chest is a spider of enormous dimensions…like this…(indicates with both hands.) Again, I take up a pitcher of kvass to have a drink, and in it there is something unseemly to the highest degree, something like a cockroach. (Pause.) Have you read Buckle? (Pause.) I wish to have a word with you, Avdotya Fyodorovna, if I may trouble you. Dunyasha. Well, go ahead. Yepihodov. I wish to speak with you alone. (Sighs.) Dunyasha (embarrassed). Very well. Only first bring me my little cape. You’ll find it near the wardrobe. It’s rather damp here. Yepihodov. Certainly, ma’am; I will fetch it, ma’am. Now I know what to do with my revolver. (Takes the guitar and goes off playing it.) Yasha. Two-and-Twenty Troubles! An awful fool, between you and me. (Yawns.) Dunyasha. I hope to God he doesn’t shoot himself! (Pause.) I’ve become so nervous, I’m always fretting. I was still a little girl when I was taken into the big house, I am quite unused to the simple life now, and my hands are white, as white as a lady’s. I’ve become so soft, so delicate, so refined, I’m afraid of everything. It’s so terrifying; and if you deceive me, Yasha, I don’t know what will happen to my nerves. (yasha kisses her.) Yasha. You’re a peach! Of course, a girl should never forget herself; and what I dislike more than anything is when a girl don’t behave properly. Dunyasha. I’ve fallen passionately in love with you; you’re educated— you have something to say about everything. (Pause.) Yasha (yawns). Yes, Ma’am. Now the way I look at it, if a girl loves someone, it means she is immoral. (Pause.) It’s agreeable smoking a cigar in the fresh air. (Listens.) Someone’s coming this way…It’s our madam and the others. (dunyasha embraces him impulsively.) You go home, as though you’d been to the river to bathe; go by the little path, or else they’ll run into you and suspect me of having arranged to meet you here. I can’t stand that sort of thing. Dunyasha (coughing softly). Your cigar’s made my head ache. (Exits. yasha remains standing near the chapel. Enter mme. ranevskaya, gayev, and lopahin.) Lopahin. You must make up your mind once and for all—there’s no time to lose. It’s quite a simple question, you know. Do you agree to lease your land for summer cottages or not? Answer in one word, yes or no; only one word! Mme. Ranevskaya. Who’s been smoking such abominable cigars here? (Sits down.) Gayev. Now that the railway line is so near, it’s made things very convenient. (Sits down.) Here we’ve been able to have lunch in town. Yellow ball in the side pocket! I feel like going into the house and playing just one game. Mme. Ranevskaya. You can do that later. Lopahin. Only one word! (Imploringly.) Do give me an answer! Gayev (yawning). Who? Mme. Ranevskaya (looks into her purse). Yesterday I had a lot of money and now my purse is almost empty. My poor Varya tries to economize by feeding us just milk soup; in the kitchen the old people get nothing but dried peas to eat, while I squander money thoughtlessly. (Drops the purse, scattering gold pieces.) You see there they go…(Shows vexation.) Yasha. Allow me—I’ll pick them up. (Picks up the money.) Mme. Ranevskaya. Be so kind, Yasha. And why did I go to lunch in town? That nasty restaurant, with its music and the tablecloth smelling of soap…Why drink so much, Leonid? Why eat so much? Why talk so much? Today again you talked a lot, and all so inappropriately about the seventies, about the decadents. And to whom? Talking to waiters about decadents! Lopahin. Yes. Gayev (waving his hand). I’m incorrigible; that’s obvious. (Irritably, to yasha.) Why do you keep dancing about in front of me? Yasha (laughs). I can’t hear your voice without laughing— Gayev. Either he or I— Mme. Ranevskaya. Go away, Yasha; run along. Yasha (handing mme. ranevskaya her purse). I’m going, at once. (Hardly able to suppress his laughter.) This minute. (Exits.) Lopahin. That rich man, Deriganov, wants to buy your estate. They say he’s coming to the auction himself. Mme. Ranevskaya. Where did you hear that? Lopahin. That’s what they are saying in town. Gayev. Our aunt in Yaroslavl has promised to help; but when she will send the money, and how much, no one knows. Lopahin. How much will she send? A hundred thousand? Two hundred? Mme. Ranevskaya. Oh, well, ten or fifteen thousand; and well have to be grateful for that. Lopahin. Forgive me, but such frivolous people as you are, so queer and unbusinesslike—I never met in my life. One tells you in plain language that your estate is up for sale, and you don’t seem to take it in. Mme. Ranevskaya. What are we to do? Tell us what to do. Lopahin. I do tell you, every day; every day I say the same thing! You must lease the cherry orchard and the land for summer cottages, you must do it and as soon as possible—right away. The auction is close at hand. Please understand! Once you’ve decided to have the cottages, you can raise as much money as you like, and you’re saved. Mme. Ranevskaya. Cottages—summer people—forgive me, but it’s all so vulgar. Gayev. I agree with you absolutely. Lopahin. I shall either burst into tears or scream or faint! I can’t stand it! You’ve worn me out! (To gayev.) You’re an old woman! Gayev. Who? Lopahin. An old woman! (Gets up to go.) Mme. Ranevskaya (alarmed). No,