Work: White Nights Field: white nights Author: Fyodor Dostorvsky Title: THE FOURTH NIGHT My God, what a way for it all to finish! Ah, what an ending! I got there by nine. She was already there, waiting. I caught sight of her when I was still at a distance. She was standing as she was the first time, leaning on the guardrail of the embankment, and didn’t hear me approach. “Nastenka!” I called out to her, managing to overcome my anguish. “Come here,” she said. “Hurry!” I looked at her without understanding. “Well, let me have the letter! You have it, haven’t you?” She clenched the railing with her hand. “No, I have no letter,” I said finally, “but haven’t you seen him yet?” She went terribly pale and stared at me. I had shattered her last hope. “Well, good luck to him,” she said in a gasping tone. “Good luck to him, if that’s the way he feels about me.” She lowered her eyes, then tried to look up at me, but couldn’t. For several moments more, she tried to get hold of herself, but she couldn’t. She turned her head away, leaned on the rail, and dissolved into tears. “Stop, stop…” was all I said. Looking at her, I hadn’t the strength to say more—and anyway, what else was there to say? “Don’t try to make me feel better,” she said, crying. “Don’t mention him, don’t tell me he’ll come, don’t persuade me he hasn’t thrown me over so cruelly, so callously as he has. What did I do wrong? Could it be something I wrote in that ill-fated letter?” At this point, sobs overwhelmed her. I couldn’t bear to see her this way. “Ah, how cruel and callous!” she said again. “And he never even bothered to write me a single line! If only he had answered that he didn’t need me, that he rejected me. But no, he hasn’t written a word during these three days! How easy it is for him to hurt and humiliate a poor girl whose only sin is to love him! Ah, how much I’ve been through in these three days! Ah, my God! My God! When I think that it was I who came to him in the first place, that I humbled myself before him, cried, begged him for a crumb of his love…. And after all that!…Listen,” she said, turning her flashing dark eyes to me, “it can’t be—it’s not natural—one of us, you or I, has made a mistake! Maybe he never got my letter! Maybe he doesn’t know a thing to this minute! How is it possible—please explain to me, for God’s sake—for him to be so unspeakably rude to me? Not a single word! People show more pity than that for the lowest of creatures! Maybe he’s heard something; maybe someone has told him some slander about me? What do you think?” She shouted the last question at me. “I’ll go, Nastenka, and see him on your behalf tomorrow.” “Yes?” “I’ll tell him everything and ask him to explain.” “Yes? Yes?” “Write him a letter. Don’t say no. Wait! I’ll force him to respect what you did. He’ll be told everything, and if—” “No, my dear, no, that’s enough! No more about it; not one line, not one word, enough’s enough! I don’t know him. I don’t love him any more. I’ll forget him…” She couldn’t complete her sentence. “Calm yourself, calm yourself, Nastenka! Here, sit down,” I said, indicating the bench. “But I am calm! Stop fussing! It’s true. My tears will dry. You don’t really think that I’d go and drown myself or something, do you?” My heart was overflowing. 1 tried to speak but words wouldn’t come. “Tell me!” she said, catching hold of my hand, “you wouldn’t have acted that way, would you? You wouldn’t have hurled a shameful sneer at a girl who’d come to you herself; you wouldn’t have made fun of her weak, tender heart. You’d have spared her. You’d have realized that she was lonely, unable to take care of herself, unable to prevent herself from falling in love with you, that she hadn’t done anything wrong…that she hadn’t done anything… Ah, my God, my God!” “Nastenka!” I cried, completely overcome, “you’re torturing me, Nastenka! You’re tearing at my heart, you’re killing me! I can’t remain silent! I must tell you, at last, all that has accumulated inside me.” I got up from the bench as I said that. She took my hand, looking at me surprised. “What’s come over you?” she said. “Nastenka, everything I’m going to tell you now is absurd, impossible, idiotic! I know that it can never happen, but I can’t remain silent. So, in the name of your present suffering, I beg you to forgive me in advance!” “Well, what is it?” She stopped crying and looked at me closely. There was a strange curiosity in her eyes. “I know it cannot be, but I love you, Nastenka. That’s what it is. Now you know everything.” I shrugged hopelessly. “Now see if you can still talk to me the way you did before, if you can listen to what I’m going to say—” “But what of it?” Nastenka interrupted me. “I’ve known all along that you loved me, but I thought that you just loved me simply—you know…Oh, good gracious!” “It was simply at first, Nastenka, but now—now—I’m exactly in the position you were in, Nastenka, when you came to him with that bundle of yours. In fact, my plight is even more hopeless than yours was then, for he wasn’t in love with anyone, but you are.” “What are you saying? You puzzle me altogether. But listen, why do you…I mean, how is that…Ah, God, I don’t know what I’m saying. But you…” She became completely confused. Her cheeks were on fire; she lowered her eyes. “Well, what am I to do, Nastenka, what? I’m to blame for having abused…but no, no, it’s not my fault, really—I know it, I feel it—for my heart tells me I’m right. There’s no way I can harm you or offend you! I was your friend before, and I’m your friend now. I haven’t betrayed a thing. And now, Nastenka, the tears are running down my cheeks; let ’em run, they aren’t hurting anyone. They’ll dry, Nastenka….” “Oh come, sit down, sit down,” she said, pulling me down on the bench. “Ah, dear God!” “No, Nastenka, I won’t sit down; I can’t stay here. You shouldn’t see me any more. I’ll tell you all I have in my heart, then leave. I want only to tell you that you’d never have found out I love you. I’d have kept my secret. I wouldn’t have inflicted my selfishness upon you at such a moment. No! But I couldn’t keep it to myself. It was you who brought it up; it’s your fault, it’s all your fault. You can’t send me away.” “But no, of course not. I don’t intend to send you away,” Nastenka rattled off quickly, trying, the poor dear, to conceal her embarrassment. “So you won’t send me away? But I was going to run away from you anyway. I’ll leave too, but first I must tell you everything because I could hardly bear it when you were talking and crying and so full of despair, because…well, because—let me say it, Nastenka—because you have been rejected, because your love has been spurned. I—I felt so much love for you, Nastenka, so much love…and I felt terribly bitter because I couldn’t do anything for you, despite all that love…I felt I was being torn to pieces. I couldn’t keep silent, I had to talk. I had to, Nastenka.” “Yes, yes, tell me, talk to me!” Nastenka said with an inexpressible gesture. “It must seem strange to you that I should say that, but go on, speak! I’ll explain later; I’ll explain everything!” “You’re sorry for me, Nastenka, you’re simply sorry for me. Well, the way I look at it—what is lost is lost, what has been done cannot be undone. Isn’t that so? Now you know everything, and that’s the point of departure. All right then, that’s fine, but listen to this: while you were sitting here crying, I thought—oh, please let me tell you what I thought—I thought—of course I’m well aware it cannot be, Nastenka—I thought that somehow or other, without it having anything to do with me…you didn’t love him any more…. In that case, Nastenka—I thought of that yesterday and the day before—I would’ve behaved in such a way that you’d have come to love me…. For you said yourself that you’d almost fallen in love with me, Nastenka, you said so yourself! And what then? Nothing much. That’s just about all I had to say! All I have left to describe is what it would have been like had you fallen in love with me. But there’s not much I