continue..
he said moodily: “I must send a wire!” The attractions of the pool palling, they went back to the hotel. Ashurst sent his wire, addressing it to Mrs. Narracombe: “Sorry, detained for the night, back tomorrow.” Surely Megan would understand that he had too much to do; and his heart grew lighter. It was a lovely afternoon, warm, the sea calm and blue, and swimming his great passion; the favor of these pretty children flattered him, the pleasure of looking at them, at Stella, at Halliday’s sunny face; the slight unreality, yet extreme naturalness of it all—as of a last peep at normality before he took this plunge with Megan! He got his borrowed bathing dress, and they all set forth. Halliday and he undressed behind one rock, the three girls behind another. He was first into the sea, and at once swam out with the bravado of justifying his self-given reputation. When he turned he could see Halliday swimming along shore, and the girls flopping and dipping, and riding the little waves, in the way he was accustomed to despise, but now thought pretty and sensible, since it gave him the distinction of the only deep-water fish. But drawing near, he wondered if they would like him, a stranger, to come into their splashing group; he felt shy, approaching that slim nymph. Then Sabina summoned him to teach her to float, and between them the little girls kept him so busy that he had no time even to notice whether Stella was accustomed to his presence, till suddenly he heard a startled sound from her. She was standing submerged to the waist, leaning a little forward, her slim white arms stretched out and pointing, her wet face puckered by the sun and an expression of fear. “Look at Phil! Is he all right? Oh, look!” Ashurst saw at once that Phil was not all right. He was splashing and struggling out of his depth, perhaps a hundred yards away; suddenly he gave a cry, threw up his arms, and went down. Ashurst saw the girl launch herself towards him, and crying out: “Go back, Stella! Go back!” he dashed out. He had never swum so fast, and reached Halliday just as he was coming up a second time. It was a case of cramp, but to get him in was not difficult, for he did not struggle. The girl, who had stopped where Ashurst told her to, helped as soon as he was in his depth, and once on the beach they sat down one on each side of him to rub his limbs, while the little ones stood by with scared faces. Halliday was soon smiling. It was—he said—rotten of him, absolutely rotten! If Frank would give him an arm, he could get to his clothes all right now. Ashurst gave him the arm, and as he did so caught sight of Stella’s face, wet and flushed and tearful, all broken up out of its calm; and he thought: “I called her Stella! Wonder if she minded?” While they were dressing, Halliday said quietly: “You saved my life, old chap!” “Rot!” Clothed, but not quite in their right minds, they went up all together to the hotel and sat down to tea, except Halliday, who was lying down in his room. After some slices of bread and jam, Sabina said: “I say, you know, you are a brick!” And Freda chimed in: “Rather!” Ashurst saw Stella looking down; he got up in confusion, and went to the window. From there he heard Sabina mutter: “I say, let’s swear blood bond. Where’s your knife, Freda?” and out of the corner of his eye he could see each of them solemnly prick herself, squeeze out a drop of blood and dabble on a bit of paper. He turned and made for the door. “Don’t be a stoat! Come back!” His arms were seized; imprisoned between the little girls he was brought back to the table. On it lay a piece of paper with an effigy drawn in blood, and the three names Stella Halliday, Sabina Halliday, Freda Halliday—also in blood, running towards it like the rays of a star. Sabina said: “That’s you. We shall have to kiss you, you know.” And Freda echoed: “Oh! Blow—Yes!” Before Ashurst could escape, some wettish hair dangled against his face, something like a bite descended on his nose, he felt his left arm pinched, and other teeth softly searching his cheek. Then he was released, and Freda said: “Now, Stella.” Ashurst, red and rigid, looked across the table at a red and rigid Stella. Sabina giggled; Freda cried: “Buck up—it spoils everything!” A queer, ashamed eagerness shot through Ashurst; then he said quietly: “Shut up, you little demons!” Again Sabina giggled. “Well, then, she can kiss her hand, and you can put it against your nose. It is on one side!” To his amazement the girl did kiss her hand and stretch it out. Solemnly he took that cool, slim hand and laid it to his cheek. The two little girls broke into clapping, and Freda said: “Now, then, we shall have to save your life at any time; that’s settled. Can I have another cup, Stella, not so beastly weak?” Tea was resumed, and Ashurst, folding up the paper, put it in his pocket. The talk turned on the advantages of measles, tangerine oranges, honey in a spoon, no lessons, and so forth. Ashurst listened, silent, exchanging friendly looks with Stella, whose face was again of its normal sun-touched pink and white. It was soothing to be so taken to the heart of this jolly family, fascinating to watch their faces. And after tea, while the two little girls pressed seaweed, he talked to Stella in the window-seat and looked at her water-colour sketches. The whole thing was like a pleasurable dream; time and incident hung up, importance and reality suspended. To-morrow he would go back to Megan, with nothing of all this left save the paper with the blood of these children, in his pocket. Children! Stella was not quite that—as old as Megan! Her talk—quick, rather hard and shy, yet friendly—seemed to flourish on his silences, and about her there was something cool and virginal—a maiden in a bower. At dinner, to which Halliday, who had swallowed too much sea-water, did not come, Sabina said: “I’m going to call you Frank.” Freda echoed: “Frank, Frank, Franky.” Ashurst grinned and bowed. “Every time Stella calls you Mr. Ashurst, she’s got to pay a forfeit. It’s ridiculous.” Ashurst looked at Stella, who grew slowly red. Sabina giggled; Freda cried: “She’s ‘smoking’—‘smoking!’—Yah!” Ashurst reached out to right and left, and grasped some fair hair in each hand. “Look here,” he said, “you two! Leave Stella alone, or I’ll tie you together!” Freda gurgled: “Ouch! You are a beast!” Sabina murmured cautiously: “You call her Stella, you see!” “Why shouldn’t I? It’s a jolly name!” “All right; we give you leave to!” Ashurst released the hair. Stella! What would she call him—after this? But she called him nothing; till at bedtime he said, deliberately: “Good night, Stella!” “Good night, Mr.—Good night, Frank! It was jolly of you, you know!” “Oh—that! Bosh!” Her quick, straight handshake tightened suddenly, and as suddenly, became slack. Ashurst stood motionless in the empty sitting-room. Only last night, under the apple-tree and the living blossoms, he had held Megan to him, kissing her eyes and lips. And he gasped, swept by that rush of remembrance. To-night it should have begun—his life with her who only wanted to be with him! And now, twenty-four hours and more must pass, because—of not looking at his watch! Why had he made friends with this family of innocents just when he was saying good-bye to innocence, and all the rest of it? “But I mean to marry her,” he thought; “I told her so!” He took a candle, lighted it, and went to his bedroom, which was next to Halliday’s. His friend’s voice called as he was passing: “Is that you, old chap? I say, come in.” He was sitting up in bed, smoking a pipe and reading. “Sit down a bit.” Ashurst sat down by the open window. “I’ve been thinking about this afternoon, you know,” said Halliday rather suddenly. “They say you go through all your past. I didn’t. I suppose I wasn’t far enough gone.” “What did you think of?” Halliday was silent for a little, then said quietly: “Well, I did think of one thing—rather odd—of a girl at Cambridge that I might have—you know; I was glad I hadn’t got her on my mind. Anyhow, old chap, I owe it to you that I’m here; I should have been in the big dark by now. No more bed, or baccy; no more anything. I say, what d’you suppose happens to us?” Ashurst murmured: “Go out like flames, I expect.” “Phew!” “We may flicker, and cling about a bit, perhaps.”