continue..
seeing how embarrassed I was, muttered some excuse and rushed off. “After that day, I felt like dying whenever I heard the slightest noise in the passage. The lodger’s coming, I said to myself each time, and I’d quietly unfasten the pin. But it was never him. “A couple of weeks passed, and the lodger sent us a note by Fyokla saying he had a lot of books, some French ones among them, and perhaps Grandmother would like him to send us some so that I might read to her to pass the time? Grandmother accepted gratefully after first inquiring whether they were decent, proper books. ‘Because if they aren’t,’ she told me, ‘I won’t allow you to read them, for I don’t want you to learn any wicked things from them, Nastenka.’ “‘But what sort of wicked things,’ I asked her, ‘could I learn from them, Grandma?’ “‘Well,’ she said, ‘they may describe young men seducing well-broughtup young girls, abducting them from their parents’ homes under the pretext of wishing to marry them, then abandoning them to their fate and perdition. I have read many books like that,’ Grandma told me, ‘and they describe that sort of thing so well and so vividly that sometimes I used to read them on the sly throughout the night and into the morning. So mind, Nastenka,’ she added, ‘you stay away from books like that. Now what are the books he’s sent us called?’ “‘They’re all novels, Grandma, novels by Sir Walter Scott.’ “‘Walter Scott, you say? You’d better make sure there’s no trick. See that he hasn’t tried to slip some note in along with them, some love letter.’ “‘No, Grandma, there’s no note…nothing.’ “‘Yes, but we’d better watch out!’ “So we started reading Walter Scott, and within a month or so, we were through almost half of it. Later he sent us some more books, including Pushkin; finally, I couldn’t imagine how I could live without books, and I stopped dreaming about marrying that Chinese prince…. “That was the situation when one day I bumped into our lodger on the stairs as I was going on some errand for Grandma. He stepped back, and I saw he’d turned red. But he laughed, said hello, inquired after Grandmother’s health, and asked me: “‘Have you read the books?’ “‘I have.’ “‘And which did you like best?’ “‘Ivanhoe,’ I said, ‘and, of course, Pushkin.’ “And that was all that happened that time. “A week later we again met on the stairs. This time Grandma hadn’t sent me. I was going somewhere on an errand of my own. It was around two in the afternoon, and that happened to be the time at which the lodger usually came home. “‘Hello,’ he said. “‘Hello,’ I answered. “‘Tell me,’ he said, ‘don’t you get bored sitting all day with your grandmother like that?’ “Now when he asked that, I don’t know why, but I became very embarrassed, and flushed. I felt humiliated because apparently even strangers were beginning to inquire about what was going on. I decided not to answer, just to turn away and leave, but I didn’t have the strength. “‘Please,’ he said, ‘forgive me for speaking to you like that. I have great respect for you, and believe me, your well-being means more to me even than it does to your grandmother. Don’t you know any girls whom you could visit?’ “I explained to him that I had only one friend, called Mashenka, and that she’d moved to Pskov with her family, and I had no one left. “‘Tell me,’ he asked then, ‘what would you say if I asked you to come to the theater with me?’ “‘The theater? But what about my grandmother?’ “‘Couldn’t you manage it without her finding out?’ “‘No,’ I said, ‘I don’t want to deceive my grandmother. Good-by.’ “‘Good-by then.’ “And that was all he said. “But, after dinner, he came down to our rooms, sat down, and had a long talk with Grandma. He asked her whether she ever went out and whether she had any friends, then suddenly slipped in, as if in passing: “‘I have tickets, a loge in fact, for tonight’s performance of The Barber of Seville. Some friends of mine got them, but couldn’t make it tonight, so I have the tickets—’ “‘The Barber of Seville!’ Grandmother exclaimed. Why, it must be the same Barber they used to put on in the good old days!’ “‘Yes, ma’am,’ the lodger said, ‘the very same!’ “And as he said that he gave a look that made me go crimson and set my heart skipping in expectation. “‘That’s one opera that I really know,’ Grandmother said. ‘In fact, in my younger days, I myself sang Rosina in an amateur dramatic group.’ “‘Wouldn’t you like to come with me tonight? I think it’d be a shame to waste the tickets.’ “‘Well, I don’t see why we shouldn’t go,’ Grandma decided, ‘especially as my Nastenka here has never been to the theater.’ “Ah, what a joy it was! We immediately started preparing, got dressed, and drove over to the Opera. Grandma, although she couldn’t see a thing, still wanted to listen to the music. And, deep down, she was a kind old thing and very pleased that I should have such fun—we would never have gone anywhere without this opportunity. “I won’t describe my impressions of The Barber of Seville, but I’ll tell you that all that evening the lodger kept looking at me so nicely and talking to me so eloquently that I realized that, by asking me earlier whether I’d come to the theater with him in secret, he’d only wanted to test me. Ah, it was such joy! So I went to bed incredibly proud and happy, and my heart beat so hard that I worked up a slight fever and raved about The Barber of Seville the rest of the night. “I imagined, after that, that he’d come to see us often. But, on the contrary, he hardly ever came. He might come in once or twice a month, and only to invite us to the theater. In fact, we went twice more with him, I believe. But I was no longer happy on those occasions. I thought he was just sorry for me, leading that sad life with my grandmother, and that there was nothing else to it on his part. And, as time went by, strange moods started coming over me. I was unable to stay quiet, unable to take in what I was reading, unable to concentrate on my work; sometimes I burst out laughing just to irritate grandmother, and sometimes I suddenly dissolved into tears. I grew very thin and was almost seriously ill. The opera season was over, and the lodger stopped coming at all. And when he did meet me—always on the stairs, of course—he bowed so unsmilingly that I felt sure he didn’t even wish to talk to me; and after he had already left the house, I would still be standing in the middle of the stairs, red as a cherry, for when I saw him, the blood never failed to rush to my head. “Now, let me tell the end of my story. Just a year ago, in May, the lodger came to tell my grandmother that his business in Petersburg was over and that he must now move to Moscow. When I heard that, I turned as pale as the tablecloth and went all limp in my chair. Grandma never noticed anything; the lodger just said good night and left. “What was I to do? I racked my brains in despair, and finally, I decided. The day before he was to leave I decided to take a desperate step in the evening, after Grandma had gone to bed. And I did. I picked out some dresses and the necessary underwear, made a bundle out of them and, carrying it, went, half-alive, half-dead, upstairs to the lodger’s room. Walking up that flight of stairs seemed to take a whole hour. “When I opened his door, he turned his head and, seeing me, let out a cry. He must have taken me for a ghost, for I had turned white, and my legs were hardly able to carry me. He hurried to get me some water. My heart was beating so hard it hurt, and my head ached, and everything inside it went all blurry. “When I came to, the first thing I did was put my bundle on his bed, sit down next to it myself, and let my tears pour in two rivers. I believe he understood everything right away. He stood there looking at me, and his expression was so wretched that my heart was torn by a terrible anguish. “‘Nastenka,’ he said at last, ‘I want you to understand. I can do nothing. I’m poor; I haven’t a thing to my name. I don’t even have a decent job. So what