continue..
occur, an instance in which a similar difficulty has actually occurred may be quoted. An attempt has been made to define the “hardness” of a body by saying that A is harder than B if A will scratch B. Thus diamond will scratch glass, glass iron, iron lead, lead chalk, and chalk butter; so that the definition leads to the order of hardness: diamond, glass, iron, lead, chalk, butter. But if there is to be a definite order, it must be true in all cases that if A is harder than B and B than C, then A is harder than C; in other words, if A will scratch B and B C, then A will scratch C. But it is found experimentally that there are exceptions to this rule, when we try to include all bodies within it and not only such simple examples as have been quoted. Accordingly the definition does not lead to a definite order of hardness and does not permit the measurement of hardness. There are other laws of the same kind that have to be true if the order is to be definite and the measurement significant; but they will not be given in detail. One of them the reader may discover for himself, if he will consider the property colour. Colour is not a property measurable in the way we are considering, and for this reason. If we take all reds (say) of a given shade, we can arrange them definitely in an order of lightness and darkness; but no colour other than red will fall in this order. On the other hand, we might possibly take all shades and arrange them in order of redness—pure red, orange, yellow, and so on; but in this order there would be no room for reds of different lightness. Colours cannot be arranged in a single order, and it is for this reason that colour is not measurable as is density. Numerical Laws. But though arrangement in this manner in an order and the assignment of numerals in the order of the properties are to some extent measurement and represent something physically significant, there is still a large arbitrary element involved. If the properties A, B, C, D, are naturally arranged in that order, then in assigning numerals to represent the properties I must not assign to A 10, to B 3, to C 25, to D 18; for if I did so the order of the numerals would not be that of the properties. But I have an endless number of alternatives left; I might put A 1, B 2, C 3, D 4; or A 10, B 100, C 1,000, D 10,000; or A 3, B 9, C 27, D 81; and so on. In the true and fundamental measurement of the first part of the chapter there was no such latitude. When I had fixed the numeral to be assigned to one property, there was no choice at all of the numerals to be assigned to the others; they were all fixed. Can I remove this latitude here too and find a way of fixing definitely what numeral is to be assigned to represent each property? In some cases, I can; and one of these cases is density. The procedure is this. I find that by combining the numerals representing other properties of the bodies, which can be measured definitely according to the fundamental process, I can obtain a numeral for each body, and that these numerals lie in the order of the property I want to measure. If I take these numerals as representing the property, then I still get numerals in the right order, but the numeral for each property is definitely fixed. An example will be clearer than this general statement. In the case of density, I find that if I measure the weight and the volume of a body (both measurable by the fundamental process and therefore definitely fixed), and I divide the weight by the volume, then the numerals thus obtained for different bodies lie in the order of their densities, as density was defined on pp. 215–216. Thus I find that 1 gallon of water weighs 10 lb., but 1 gallon of mercury weighs 135 lb.; the weight divided by the volume for water is 10, for mercury is 135; 135 is greater than 10; accordingly, if the method is correct, mercury should be denser than water and any body which sinks in mercury should sink in water. And that is actually found to be true. If therefore I take as the measure of the density of a substance, its weight divided by its volume, then I get a number which is definitely fixed, and the order of which represents the order of density. I have arrived at a method of measurement which is as definitely fixed as the fundamental process and yet conveys adequately the physically significant facts about order. The invention of this process of measurement for properties not suited for fundamental measurement is a very notable achievement of deliberate scientific investigation. The process was not invented by common sense; it was certainly invented in the historic period, but it was not until the middle of the eighteenth century that its use became widespread. To-day it is one of the most powerful weapons of scientific investigation; and it is because so many of the properties of importance to other sciences are measured in this way that physics, the science to which this process belongs, is so largely the basis of other sciences. But it may appear exceedingly obvious to the reader, and he may wonder why the invention was delayed so long. He may say that the notion of density, in the sense that a given volume of the denser substance weighs more than the same volume of the less dense, is the fundamental notion; it is what we mean when we speak of one substance being denser (or in popular language “heavier”) than another; and that all that has been discovered in this instance is that the denser body, in this sense, is also denser in the sense of pp. 215–216. This in itself would be a very noteworthy discovery, but the reader who raises such an objection has overlooked a yet more noteworthy discovery that is involved. For we have observed that it is one of the most characteristic features of density that it is the same for all bodies, large and small, made of the same substance. It is this feature which makes it impossible to measure it by the fundamental process. The new process will be satisfactory only if it preserves this feature. If we are going to represent density by the weight divided by the volume, the density of all bodies made of the same sub stance will be the same, as it should be, only if for all of them the weight divided by the density is the same, that is to say, in rather more technical language, if the weight is proportional to the density. In adopting the new process for measuring density and assigning numerals to represent it in a significant manner, we are, in fact, assuming that, for portions of the same substance, whether they are large or small, the weight is proportional to the volume. If we take a larger portion of the same substance and thereby double the weight, we must find, if the process of measurement is to be a success, that we also double the volume; and this law must be true for all substances to which the conception of density is applicable at all. Of course every one knows that this relation is actually true; it is so familiar that we are apt to forget that it is an experimental truth that was discovered relatively late in the history of civilization, which easily might not be true. Perhaps it is difficult to-day to conceive that when we take “more” of a substance (meaning thereby a greater volume) the weight should not increase, but it is quite easy to conceive that the weight should not increase proportionally to the volume; and yet it is upon strict proportionality that the measurement of density actually depends. If the weight had not been proportional to the volume, it might still have been possible to measure density, so long as there was some fixed numerical relation between weight and volume. It is this idea of a fixed numerical relation, or, as we shall call it henceforward, a numerical law, that is the basis of the “derived” process of measurement that we are considering; and the process is of such importance to science because it is so intimately connected with such numerical laws. The recognition of such laws is the foundation of modern physics. The Importance of Measurement. For why is the process of measurement of such vital importance; why are we so concerned to assign numerals to represent properties. One reason doubtless is that such assignment