continue..
theory of the soul from Aristotle’s De Anima in order to appreciate it as poetry. Indeed, if we worry too much about it at first as philosophy we are likely to prevent ourselves from receiving the poetic beauty. It is the philosophy of that world of poetry which we have entered. But with the xxviith canto we have left behind the stage of punishment and the stage of dialectic, and approach the state of Paradise. The last cantos have the quality of the Paradiso and prepare us for it; they move straightforward, with no detour or delay. The three poets, Virgil, Statius, and Dante, pass through the wall of flame which separates Purgatory from the Earthly Paradise. Virgil dismisses Dante, who henceforth shall proceed with a higher guide, saying: Poem ```Non aspettar mio dir più, nè mio cenno. Libero, dritto e sano è tuo arbitrio, e fallo fora non fare a suo senno: per ch’io te sopra te corono e mitrio.``` No more expect my word, or sign. Your Will is free, straight and whole and not to follow its direction would be sin: wherefore I crown and mitre you (king and bishop) over yourself. I.e., Dante has now arrived at a condition, for the purposes of the rest of his journey, which is that of the blessed: for political and ecclesiastical organization are only required because of the imperfections of the human will. In the Earthly Paradise Dante encounters a lady named Matilda, whose identity need not at first bother us, Poem ```una donna soletta, che si gia cantando ed iscegliendo fior da fiore, ond’ era pinta tutta la sua via.``` A lady alone, who went singing and plucking flower after flower, where-with her path was pied. After some conversation and explanation by Matilda of the reason and nature of the place, there follows a “Divine Pageant.” To those who dislike—not what are popularly called pageants—but the serious pageants of royalty, of the church, of military funerals—the “pageantry” which we find here and in the Paradiso will be tedious; and still more to those, if there be any, who are unmoved by the splendour of the Revelations of St. John. It belongs to the world of what I call the high dream, and the modern world seems capable only of the low dream. I arrived at accepting it, myself, only with some difficulty. There were at least two prejudices, one against pre-Raphaelite imagery, which was natural to one of my generation, and perhaps affects generations younger than mine. The other prejudice—which affects this end of the Purgatorio and the whole of the Paradiso—is the prejudice that poetry not only must be found through suffering but can find its material only in suffering. Everything else was cheerfulness, optimism, and hopefulness; and these words stood for a great deal of what one hated in the nineteenth century. It took me many years to recognize that the states of improvement and beatitude which Dante describes are still further from what the modern world can conceive as cheerfulness, than are his states of damnation. And little things put one off: Rossetti’s Blessed Damozel, first by my rapture and next by my revolt, held up my appreciation of Beatrice by many years. We cannot understand fully Canto xxx of the Purgatorio until we know the Vita Nuova, which in my opinion should be read after the Divine Comedy. But at least we can begin to understand how skilfully Dante expresses the recrudescence of an ancient passion in a new emotion, in a new situation, which comprehends, enlarges, and gives a meaning to it. Poem ```sopra candido vel cinta d’oliva donna m’apparve, sotto verde manto, vestita di color di fiamma viva. E lo spirito mio, che già cotanto tempo era stato che alla sua presenza non era di stupor, tremando, affranto, senza degli occhi aver più conoscenza, per occulta virtù che da lei mosse, d’antico amor sentì la gran potenza. Tosto che nella vista mi percosse l’alta virtù, che già m’avea trafitto primo ch’io fuor di puerizia fosse, volsemi alla sinistra col rispitto col quale il fantolin corre alla mamma, quando ha paura o quando egli è afflito, per dicere a Virgilio: “Men che dramma di sangue m’ è rimaso, che non tremi; conosco i segni dell’ antica fiamma.”``` Olive-crowned over a white veil, a lady appeared to me, clad under a green mantle in colour of living flame. And my spirit, after so many years since trembling in her presence it had been broken with awe, without further knowledge by my eyes, felt, through hidden power which went out from her, the great strength of the old love. As soon as that lofty power struck my sense, which already had transfixed me before my adolescence, I turned leftwards with the trust of the little child who runs to his mama when he is frightened or distressed, to say to Virgil: “Hardly a drop of blood in my body does not shudder: I know the tokens of the ancient flame.” And in the dialogue that follows we see the passionate conflict of the old feelings with the new; the effort and triumph of a new renunciation, greater than renunciation at the grave, because a renunciation of feelings that persist beyond the grave. In a way, these cantos are those of the greatest personal intensity in the whole poem. In the Paradiso Dante himself, save for the Cacciaguida episode, becomes de- or super-personalized; and it is in these last cantos of the Purgatorio, rather than in the Paradiso, that Beatrice appears most clearly. But the Beatrice theme is essential to the understanding of the whole, not because we need to know Dante’s biography—not, for instance, as the Wesendonck history is supposed to cast light upon Tristan—but because of Dante’s philosophy of it. This, however, concerns more our examination of the Vita Nuova. The Purgatorio is the most difficult because it is the transitional canto: the Inferno is one thing, comparatively easy; the Paradiso is another thing, more difficult as a whole than the Purgatorio, because more a whole. Once we have got the hang of the kind of feeling in it no one part is difficult. The Purgatorio, here and there, might be called “dry”: the Paradiso is never dry, it is either incomprehensible or intensely exciting. With the exception of the episode of Cacciaguida—a pardonable exhibition of family and personal pride, because it provides splendid poetry—it is not episodic. All the other characters have the best credentials. At first, they seem less distinct than the earlier unblessed people; they seem ingeniously varied but fundamentally monotonous variations of insipid blessedness. It is a matter of gradual adjustment of our vision. We have (whether we know it or not) a prejudice against beatitude as material for poetry. The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries knew nothing of it; even Shelley, who knew Dante well and who towards the end of his life was beginning to profit by it, the one English poet of the nineteenth century who could even have begun to follow those footsteps, was able to enounce the proposition that our sweetest songs are those which sing of saddest thought. The early work of Dante might confirm Shelley; the Paradiso provides the counterpart, though a different counterpart from the philosophy of Browning. The Paradiso is not monotonous. It is as various as any poem. And take the Comedy as a whole, you can compare it to nothing but the entire dramatic work of Shakespeare. The comparison of the Vita Nuova with the Sonnets is another, and interesting, occupation. Dante and Shakespeare divide the modern world between them; there is no third. We should begin by thinking of Dante fixing his gaze on Beatrice: Poem ```Nel suo aspetto tal dentro mi fei, qual si fe’ Glauco nel gustar dell’ erba, che il fe’ consorto in mar degli altri dei. Trasumanar significar per verba non si poria; pero l’esemplo basti a cui esperienza grazia serba.``` Gazing on her, so I became within, as did Glaucus, on tasting of the grass which made him sea-fellow of the other gods. To transcend humanity may not be told in words, wherefore let the instance suffice for him for whom that experience is reserved by Grace. And as Beatrice says to Dante: “You make yourself dull with false fancy”; warns him, that here there are divers sorts of blessedness, as settled by Providence. If this is not enough, Dante is informed by Piccarda (Canto iii) in words which even those who know no Dante know: Poem ```la sua voluntade è nostra pace.``` His will is our peace. It is the mystery of the inequality, and of the indifference of that inequality, in blessedness, of the blessed. It is all the same, and yet each degree differs. Shakespeare gives the greatest width of human passion; Dante the greatest altitude and greatest depth. They complement each other. It is futile to ask which undertook the more difficult job. But certainly the “difficult passages” in the