continue..
a good one! Mme. Ranevskaya. It can’t be helped. Give it to him! He needs it. He’ll pay it back. mme . ranevskaya , trofimov , pishchik , and firs go out; gayev , varya , and yasha remain . Gayev. Sister hasn’t got out of the habit of throwing money around. (To yasha.) Go away, my good fellow, you smell of the barnyard. Yasha (with a grin). And you, Leonid Andreyevich, are just the same as ever. Gayev. Who? (To varya) What did he say? Varya (to yasha). Your mother’s come from the village; she’s been sitting in the servants’ room since yesterday, waiting to see you. Yasha. Botheration! Varya. You should be ashamed of yourself! Yasha. She’s all I needed! She could have come tomorrow. (Exits.) Varya. Mamma is just the same as ever; she hasn’t changed a bit. If she had her own way, she’d keep nothing for herself. Gayev. Yes…(Pauses.) If a great many remedies are offered for some disease, it means it is incurable; I keep thinking and racking my brains; I have many remedies, ever so many, and that really means none. It would be fine if we came in for a legacy; it would be fine if we married off our Anya to a very rich man; or we might go to Yaroslavl and try our luck with our aunt, the Countess. She’s very, very rich, you know…. Varya (weeping). If only God would help us! Gayev. Stop bawling. Aunt’s very rich, but she doesn’t like us. In the first place, Sister married a lawyer who was no nobleman…(anya appears in the doorway.) She married beneath her, and it can’t be said that her behavior has been very exemplary. She’s good, kind, sweet, and I love her, but no matter what extenuating circumstances you may adduce, there’s no denying that she has no morals. You sense it in her least gesture. Varya (in a whisper). Anya’s in the doorway. Gayev. Who? (Pauses.) It’s queer, something got into my right eye—my eyes are going back on me…. And on Thursday, when I was in the circuit court— Enter anya . Varya. Why aren’t you asleep, Anya? Anya. I can’t get to sleep, I just can’t. Gayev. My little pet! (Kisses anya’s face and hands.) My child! (Weeps.) You are not my niece, you’re my angel! You’re everything to me. Believe me, believe— Anya. I believe you, Uncle. Everyone loves you and respects you…but, Uncle dear, you must keep still…. You must. What were you saying just now about my mother? Your own sister? What made you say that? Gayev. Yes, yes…(Covers his face with her hand.) Really, that was awful! Good God! Heaven help me! Just now I made a speech to the bookcase…so stupid! And only after I was through, I saw how stupid it was. Varya. It’s true, Uncle dear, you ought to keep still. Just don’t talk, that’s all. Anya. If you could only keep still, it would make things easier for you too. Gayev. I’ll keep still. (Kisses anya’s and varya’s hands.) I will. But now about business. On Thursday I was in court; well, there were a number of us there, and we began talking of one thing and another, and this and that, and do you know, I believe it will be possible to raise a loan on a promissory note, to pay the interest at the bank. Varya. If only God would help us! Gayev. On Tuesday I’ll go and see about it again. (To varya.) Stop bawling. (To anya.) Your mamma will talk to Lopahin, and he, of course, will not refuse her…and as soon as you’re rested, you’ll go to Yaroslavl to the Countess, your great-aunt. So we’ll be working in three directions at once, and the thing is in the bag. We’ll pay the interest—I’m sure of it. (Puts a candy in his mouth.) I swear on my honor, I swear by anything you like, the estate shan’t be sold. (Ex citedly.) I swear by my own happiness! Here’s my hand on it, you can call me a swindler and a scoundrel if I let it come to an auction! I swear by my whole being. Anya (relieved and quite happy again). How good you are, Uncle, and how clever! (Embraces him.) Now I’m at peace, quite at peace, I’m happy. Enter firs . Firs (reproachfully). Leonid Andreyevich, have you no fear of God? When are you going to bed? Gayev. Directly, directly. Go away, Firs, I’ll…yes, I will undress myself. Now, children, ’nightie-’nightie. We’ll consider details tomorrow, but now go to sleep. (Kisses anya and varya.) I am a man of the eighties; they have nothing good to say of that period nowadays. Nevertheless, in the course of my life I have suffered not a little for my convictions. It’s not for nothing that the peasant loves me; one should know the peasant; one should know from which— Anya. There you go again, Uncle. Varya. Uncle dear, be quiet. Firs (angrily). Leonid Andreyevich! Gayev. I’m coming, I’m coming! Go to bed! Double bank shot in the side pocket! Here goes a clean shot… Exits, firs hobbling after him . Anya. I am at peace now. I don’t want to go to Yaroslavl—I don’t like my great-aunt, but still, I am at peace, thanks to Uncle. (Sits down.) Varya. We must get some sleep. I’m going now. While you were away something unpleasant happened. In the old servants’ quarters there are only the old people, as you know; Yefim, Polya, Yevstigney, and Karp, too. They began letting all sorts of rascals in to spend the night…. I didn’t say anything. Then I heard they’d been spreading a report that I gave them nothing but dried peas to eat—out of stinginess, you know…and it was all Yevstigney’s doing…. All right, I thought, if that’s how it is, I thought, just wait. I sent for Yevstigney…. (Yawns.) He comes…. “How’s this, Yevstigney?” I say, “You fool…” (Looking at anya.) Anichka! (Pauses.) She’s asleep. (Puts her arm around anya.) Come to your little bed. …Come…(Leads her.) My darling has fallen asleep…. Come. They go out. Far away beyond the orchard a shepherd is piping. trofimov crosses the stage and, seeing varya and anya , stands still . Varya. Sh! She’s asleep…asleep…Come, darling. Anya (softly, half-asleep). I’m so tired. Those bells…uncle…dear…. Mamma and Uncle… Varya. Come, my precious, come along. (They go into anya’s room.) Trofimov (with emotion). My sunshine, my spring!