Work: White Nights Field: white nights Author: Fyodor Dostorvsky Title: THE MORNING My nights were over. It was the morning after. The weather was bad. It was raining. The rain beat a gloomy tattoo on my window. It was dark inside my room and bleak outside the windows. My head ached. Objects swam before my eyes. Fever was sneaking along my limbs. “There’s a letter for you.” Matryona’s voice hovered somewhere over me. “It has just come.” I jumped up. “What letter? From whom?” “How do I know who it’s from? Look; maybe it says inside who wrote it.” I opened it. It was from her. It said: Please, please forgive me! I beg you on my knees. Forgive me! I deceived both you and myself. It was a dream, a mirage. I feel terrible about you now. Forgive me, forgive me! Don’t be too hard on me, for what I feel for you hasn’t changed. I told you I loved you—well, I do love you, and it’s even more than love. Oh, God, if only it were possible to love both of you at the same time! Ah, if only you could be him! “Oh, if only he could be you.” The thought flashed through my head. I remembered your very words, Nastenka. The letter continued: Letter ```your Nastenka God only knows what I wouldn’t do for you! I know that you feel sad and depressed. I have hurt you. But, as you know, we won’t resent for long a wound inflicted by those we love, and you do love me! Thank you! Yes, thank you for that love! It lingers now in my memory like a sweet dream that remains long after awakening. I will always remember the moment when you opened your heart to me so fraternally and when you so nobly accepted the gift of my heart—wounded as it was—to love and cherish it, and heal its wounds…. If you forgive me, my memory of you will be ennobled by gratitude that will never fade. I shall cherish that memory, be faithful to it always, never betray it, never betray my heart—it is too constant for that. Only yesterday it went back to the one to whom it belongs forever. We’ll meet again. You’ll come to see us. You won’t abandon us. You’ll always be my friend and my brother. And when we meet, you’ll give me your hand, won’t you? You’ll give it to me because you love me as much as ever. Please love me, and don’t abandon me, because I love you so much at this moment, because I’m worthy of your love, because I’ll earn it…oh, my dear, dear friend! I’m marrying him next week. He came back to me full of love. He hadn’t forgotten me…. You won’t be angry with me for writing this about him, will you? I want to come and see you with him. You’ll like him, won’t you? So forgive, remember, and go on loving``` I read and reread that letter. I was on the verge of tears. At last it fell from my hands, and I covered my face. “Here, look at that!” Matryona said. “What is it, old woman?” “Why, I’ve swept all them cobwebs from the ceiling so now you can marry any time and, while you’re at it, invite a houseful of guests.” I looked at Matryona. She was still vigorous. She was a very young old woman, but I suddenly visualized her all wrinkled and shrunk, an invalid. And I don’t know why, but my whole room suddenly aged the way an old woman ages. The walls and the ceilings peeled, everything faded, cobwebs multiplied…. And when I looked out of the window, I don’t know why, but the house opposite turned dimmer too, the plaster on its columns fell off, the cornices became all grimy and full of cracks, and the walls, which used to be dark yellow, turned grayish. A ray of sun that for a second had broken through a rain cloud disappeared behind it again, and everything darkened once more. Or was it just my sad and barren future that flashed before me? Did I see myself exactly the way I am now, fifteen years later, having aged in this very room, just as lonely, still living with Matryona, who hasn’t grown any more intelligent in all these years. I remember the hurt inflicted upon me, Nastenka! But I never sent a dark cloud to sail over your clear, serene sky. I never reproached you, never made you sad or gave you a secret guilty feeling. I never trampled any of the tender flowers that you entwined in your black curls when you walked to the altar with him. Oh, never, never! So may the sky lie cloudless over you, and your smile be bright and carefree; be blessed for the moment of bliss and happiness you gave to another heart, a lonely and a grateful one. My God, a moment of bliss. Why, isn’t that enough for a whole lifetime?