continue..
be renewed too. I like revisiting, at certain times, spots where I was once happy; I like to shape the present in the image of the irretrievable past. So I often roam like a sad, gloomy shadow, without need or aim, along Petersburg’s streets and alleys. And what memories come to me! I may remember, for instance, that exactly one year ago, at this very hour, in this very street, I was walking along this very sidewalk, just as gloomy and lonely as now. And I may remember that although my dreams were sad and life was painful, somehow it was not as agonizing as it has become now; the black forebodings that have since taken hold of me weren’t there yet; nor was there the gnawing, dreary feeling of guilt that now torments me day and night, never leaving me a moment’s peace. And so I ask myself: ‘Where are your dreams?’ And I shake my head and mutter: ‘How the years go by!’ And I ask myself again: ‘What have you done with those years? Where have you buried your best moments? Have you really lived? Look,’ I say to myself, ‘how cold it is becoming all over the world!’ And more years will pass and behind them will creep grim isolation. Tottering senility will come hobbling, leaning on a crutch, and behind these will come unrelieved boredom and despair. The world of fancies will fade, dreams will wilt and die and fall like autumn leaves from the trees…. Ah, Nastenka, won’t it be sad to be left alone, all, all alone, without even having anything to regret—nothing, but nothing; for everything I’ve lost is nothing but a stupid, round zero, nothing but a flimsy fancy?” “Stop it, stop it….” Nastenka brushed away a little tear. “It’s all over now. Now there’ll be the two of us. Now, whatever happens, we’ll never part again. Listen, I’m only an ordinary girl. I’ve studied very little, although my grandmother did hire a teacher for me. But, believe me, I understand everything you’ve said because I felt the same way when Grandma pinned me to her dress. Of course, I can’t express it as well as you because of my lack of education,” she remarked shyly, apparently feeling that she ought to pay tribute to my pathetic monologue and highflown style. “But I’m very glad that you’ve told me everything so frankly. Now I know you completely. And now I want to tell you my story, without holding anything back, then perhaps you’ll give me your advice. You are so intelligent—I want you to promise to give me advice.” “Ah, Nastenka, I’ve never been much of an advisor, especially an intelligent advisor, but since we’re going to be together, I feel that my advice will be terribly clever and that each of us will have many, many intelligent suggestions to offer the other. Well, then, pretty Nastenka, let’s see what advice I can give you. Come, tell me everything—I’m so happy, cheerful, daring, and clever that I’m sure I won’t have to search for words.” “No!” Nastenka laughed. “It isn’t clever advice I’m after, it’s brotherly understanding from someone who, as it were, has loved me all my life.” “That suits me, Nastenka, suits me fine! As to loving, had I loved you for twenty years, I’m sure I couldn’t possibly love you more than I do now.” “Give me your hand,” Nastenka said. I gave it to her. “Here goes,” she said. “You already know half my story. You know I have an old grandmother—” “If the other half is as short as the one I know…” I interjected, laughing. “No, just keep quiet and listen. Don’t interrupt me; it puts me off. Just listen. “I have an old grandmother. I’ve lived with her ever since I was a very little girl, because my parents are dead. Grandma apparently was much better off before, for she keeps remembering better days. It was she who taught me French and later hired a teacher for me. I stopped taking lessons when I was fifteen—I’m seventeen now. When I was fifteen, I did something naughty. I won’t go into what I did exactly, except to say that it wasn’t much. Still, Grandma called me over to her that morning and said that since she was blind she couldn’t very well watch me. Then she took a safety pin and pinned my dress to hers, saying that we were going to stay sitting like that forever, unless, of course, my behavior improved. Well, to make it short, at first it was impossible for me to move away from her; I had to work, study, read—everything—sitting by my grandmother’s side. Once I tried to trick her by persuading our maid Fyokla to sit in for me. Grandma had fallen asleep in her armchair. Fyokla is deaf, you see, and she took my place while I ran out to the house of a girl, a friend of mine who lived nearby. But it ended badly. Grandma woke up and asked something, assuming that it was me. Fyokla saw Grandma was trying to say something but, of course, she couldn’t hear what it was. So, not knowing what else to do, she unfastened the pin and ran away.” This memory made Nastenka laugh so much that she had to interrupt herself. I laughed too, but as soon as she realized I was laughing, she stopped short and said: “Now look here, you mustn’t laugh at Grandma! I laugh because I can’t help it—she really is so funny. But then, you see, I’m fond of her at the same time. Anyway, I was in real trouble. She pinned me to her again, and I wasn’t even allowed to move. “Ah, I forgot to tell you that my grandma owns the house we live in. It’s just a tiny wooden house with three windows, and almost as old as she is. It also has an attic room, and a new lodger came to live in the attic—” “Therefore, I assume that there was a lodger before him,” I remarked. “Of course there was—and he could keep quiet much better than you can,” Nastenka said. “True, he had difficulty moving his tongue at all, for he was a very, very old man, quite mute, blind, and lame; in the end, living became too much for him and he just died. So a new lodger took his place, for we can’t afford not to have a lodger. That and Grandma’s pension make up our entire income. Now, the new lodger happened to be a young man. He came from out of town. When Grandma told him what the rent was, he didn’t bargain, so she took him and then asked me: “‘Tell me, Nastenka, the new lodger is a young man, isn’t he?’ “I couldn’t lie to her, so I said that although he wasn’t old, he wasn’t so young either. “‘Is he good-looking?’ she asked me then. “Again I didn’t want to lie. “‘Yes, Grandma, he’s quite good-looking.’ “‘Ah, that’s really too bad!’ Grandma said, ‘because I’m asking you all these questions so you won’t keep staring at him. Ah, what times we live in,’ she added. ‘Think of it—just an insignificant lodger and he turns out to be handsome, too. Ah, what’re we all coming to? You never saw such things happening in the good old days.’ “According to Grandma, everything was just wonderful in the good old days—she was younger in those days, and the sun shone brighter and was warmer, and milk didn’t go bad as it does now! And while she goes on and on like that, I sit in silence and think to myself: ‘It looks as if Grandma were trying to give me ideas, asking whether the lodger is handsome or not.’ And then I got absorbed in counting the stitches in my knitting, and the lodger completely vanished from my mind. “Then one morning the lodger came to inquire when they were going to paper his room as he’d been promised. And, Grandma being a great hand at chatting, they got into a conversation in no time, then she says to me: ‘Nastenka, run and bring me the abacus from my bedroom.’ I don’t know why, but that made me turn red. I forgot all about the safety pin and jumped up to scamper into the other room. The movement yanked the pin and Grandma’s armchair came rolling along on its casters. I don’t know how I could have forgotten about that safety pin and neglected to unfasten it discreetly! And now, realizing that the lodger had found out about it, I stopped dead where I was and burst into tears. I felt so hopelessly ashamed and humiliated at that moment that I thought I’d never be able to face the world again. “‘What are you waiting for?’ Grandma kept shouting at me, but that only made me cry worse. And the lodger,