continue..
because he was drunk; but all you had to do was to add ten kopeks and it was a deal. This time, however, Petrovich seemed to be sober and therefore curt, intractable, and likely to charge an outrageous price. Akaky Akakievich realized this and would have liked to beat a hasty retreat, but the die was cast. Petrovich had fixed his one eye on him and Akaky Akakievich involuntarily came out with: “Hello, Petrovich.” “Wish you good day, sir,” said Petrovich and bent his eye toward Akaky Akakievich’s hands to see what kind of spoil he had brought him. “Well, Petrovich, I’ve come…see…the thing is…to…” It should be realized that Akaky Akakievich used all sorts of prepositions, adverbs and all those meaningless little parts of speech when he spoke. Moreover, if the matter were very involved, he generally didn’t finish his sentences and opened them with the words: “This, really, is absolutely, I mean to say…” and then nothing more—he had forgotten that he hadn’t said what he wanted to. “What is it then?” Petrovich asked, looking over Akaky Akakievich’s frock coat with his one eye, the collar, the sleeves, the back, the tails, the buttonholes, all of which he was already acquainted with, since, repairs and all, it was his own work. That’s just what tailors do as soon as they see you. “Well, it’s like this, Petrovich…my cloak, well, the material…look, you can see, everywhere else it’s very strong, well, it’s a bit dusty and it looks rather shabby, but it’s not really…look, it’s just in one place it’s a little…on the back here, and here too…it’s a little worn…and here on this shoulder too, a little—and that’s all. There’s not much work…” Petrovich took Akaky Akakievich’s old dressing gown, as his colleagues called it, spread it out on the table and looked it over at length. Then he shook his head and, stretching out his hand, took from the window sill a snuffbox embellished with the portrait of a general, though just what general it was impossible to tell since right where his face used to be there was now a dent glued over with a piece of paper. Taking some snuff, Petrovich spread the overcoat out on his hands, held it up against the light and again shook his head. Then he turned the overcoat inside out, with the lining up, and shook his head again. Then, once more, he removed the snuffbox lid with its general under the piece of paper, and, stuffing snuff into his nose, closed the box, put it away, and finally said: “No. It can’t be mended. It’s no use.” At these words, Akaky Akakievich’s heart turned over. “But why can’t it be, Petrovich?” he said in the imploring voice of a child. “Look, the only trouble is that it’s worn around the shoulders. I’m sure you have some scraps of cloth…” “As for scraps, I suppose I could find them,” Petrovich said, “but I couldn’t sew them on. The whole thing is rotten. It’d go to pieces the moment you touched it with a needle.” “Well, if it starts to go, you’ll catch it with a patch…” “But there’s nothing for patches to hold to. It’s too far gone. It’s only cloth in name—a puff of wind and it’ll disintegrate.” “Still, I’m sure you can make them hold just the same. Otherwise, really, Petrovich, see what I mean…” “No,” Petrovich said with finality, “nothing can be done with it. It’s just no good. You’d better make yourself some bands out of it to wrap round your legs when it’s cold and socks aren’t enough to keep you warm. The Germans thought up those things to make money for themselves.”—Petrovich liked to take a dig at the Germans whenever there was a chance.—“As to the overcoat, it looks as if you’ll have to have a new one made.” At the word “new” Akaky Akakievich’s vision became foggy and the whole room began to sway. The only thing he saw clearly was the general with the paper-covered face on the lid of Petrovich’s snuffbox. “What do you mean a new one?” he said, talking as if in a dream. “I haven’t even got the money…” “A new one,” Petrovich repeated with savage calm. “Well, but if I really had to have a new one, how would it be that…” “That is, what will it cost?” “Yes.” “Well, it will be over one hundred and fifty rubles,” Petrovich said, pursing his lips meaningfully. He liked strong effects, he liked to perplex someone suddenly and then observe the grimace that his words produced. “A hundred and fifty rubles for an overcoat!” shrieked the poor Akaky Akakievich, shrieked perhaps for the first time in his life, since he was always noted for his quietness. “Yes, sir,” said Petrovich, “but what an overcoat! And if it is to have marten on the collar and a silk-lined hood, that’ll bring it up to two hundred.” “Please, Petrovich, please,” Akaky Akakievich said beseechingly, not taking in Petrovich’s words or noticing his dramatic effects, “mend it somehow, just enough to make it last a little longer.” “No sir, it won’t work. It would be a waste of labor and money.” Akaky Akakievich left completely crushed. And when he left, Petrovich, instead of going back to his work, remained for a long time immobile, his lips pursed meaningfully. He was pleased with himself for having upheld his own honor as well as that of the entire tailoring profession. Akaky Akakievich emerged into the street feeling as if he were in a dream. “So that’s it,” he repeated to himself. “I never suspected it would turn out this way…” then, after a brief pause, he went on: “So that’s it! Here’s how it turns out in the end, and I, really, simply couldn’t have foreseen it.” After another, longer pause, he added: “And so here we are! Here’s how things stand. I in no way expected…but this is impossible…what a business!” Muttering thus, instead of going home, he went in the opposite direction, without having the slightest idea of what was going on. As he was walking, a chimney sweep brushed his dirty side against him and blackened his whole shoulder; a whole bucketful of lime was showered over him from the top of a house under construction. But he noticed nothing and only when he bumped into a watchman who, resting his halberd near him, was shaking some snuff out of a horn into his calloused palm, did he come to a little and that only because the watchman said: “Ya hafta knock my head off? Ya got the whole sidewalk, ain’tcha?” This caused him to look about him and turn back toward home. Only then did he start to collect his thoughts and to see his real position clearly. He began to talk to himself, not in bits of phrases now but sensibly, as to a wise friend in whom he could confide. “Oh no,” he said, “this wasn’t the moment to speak to Petrovich. Right now he’s sort of…his wife obviously has given him a beating…that sort of thing. It’d be better if I went and saw him Sunday morning. After Saturday night, his one eye will be wandering and he’ll be tired and in need of another drink, and his wife won’t give him the money. So I’ll slip him a quarter and that will make him more reasonable and so, for the overcoat…” Thus Akaky Akakievich tried to reassure himself, and persuaded himself to wait for Sunday. When that day came, he waited at a distance until he saw Petrovich’s wife leave the house and then went up. After his Saturday night libations, Petrovich’s eye certainly was wandering. He hung his head and looked terribly sleepy. But, despite all that, as soon as he learned what Akaky Akakievich had come about, it was as if the devil had poked him. “It can’t be done,” he said. “You must order a new one.” Here Akaky Akakievich pressed the quarter on him. “Thank you,” Petrovich said. “I’ll drink a short one to you, sir. And as to the overcoat, you can stop worrying. It’s worthless. But I’ll make you a first-rate new one. That I’ll see to.” Akaky Akakievich tried once more to bring the conversation around to mending, but Petrovich, instead of listening, said: “I’ll make you a new one, sir, and you can count on me to do my best. I may even make the collar fastened with silver-plated clasps for you.” At this point Akaky Akakievich saw that he’d have to have a new overcoat and he became utterly depressed. Where was he going to get the money? There was of course the next holiday bonus. But the sum involved had long ago been allotted to other needs. He had to order new trousers, to pay the cobbler for replacing the tops on his boots. He owed the seamstress for three shirts and simply had