continue..
College, the more generously you open your technical courses to mathematics, even in their utilitarian aspect, the more will the professional students ultimately benefit. But having paid tribute to the demands of the market-place, let me speak for mathematics as a pure science of progressive knowledge, worthy to claim the devotion of the finest intellects to its pursuit, worthy to challenge the respect of man towards the world of learning. One of the high ideals of mankind through all the ages, and in all civilizations, has inspired the search for more knowledge wherever it can be found or be attained. Ever since man has attempted to acquire ordered knowledge, the science that deals with number and deals with form has been pursued for its own sake because, thereby, the human spirit can find unending satisfaction and unending occupation. And the creations of mathematical science have been the glory of the nations. We may recall the lost dominion of Babylon, we may think of her hanging gardens as, in their time, a wonder of the world; we may sigh over her pomp and her luxury, gone like a dream in the visions of the night; but the contributions of her Chaldean priests to astronomy survive to this day. Greece has an immortal name from her art, from her literature, from her philosophy: her rival schools of Plato and of Aristotle still dominate the Western world; but her fame is no less immortal by her bequest of geometry and of number, two of the purest theories ever devised by the human mind. We may hold Semitic science in low regard: but Arabic learning kept science alive when the rest of the intellectual world was torpid; it created algebra as the marvellous extension of the Greek arithmetic, and gave us the very digits we use and the scale of ten, so familiar to us as to seem part of our existence: we can pay our mental homage of remembrance to those ancient Arabs in southern Spain. What the modern peoples have thus inherited they have amplified beyond recognition; and the nations of the West—France, Germany, Italy, America across the ocean, our own people—have lived in an unending life-giving rivalry in the creation of mathematical knowledge, sought for its own sake, its domain as boundless as human thought itself. For there is progress still in mathematical science; there will always be progress of increasing knowledge in a world that is not dead. Results have been achieved by the noble army of great spirits of the past, and their achievements are the possession of the living. But those very achievements are the stimulus to the living that they, in their turn, shall endeavour to advance knowledge. And this pursuit is to be made by the living spirits for the sake of new knowledge, not for the sake of new glory, not for the sake of new benefit. If utility should come, well and good: but we need trouble no more about immediate utility as an aim than the Greeks troubled about the utility of their conic sections or Newton troubled about the utility of the gravitation theory. So here, amid this community in a centre of commercial activity, in this home of high learning which has been established for the betterment of men and women as human citizens, let me plead, if pleading be needed, for the highest consideration to be given to the pursuit of pure knowledge as well as technical training, not neglecting mathematics, once called the Queen of the Sciences. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and the spirit of knowledge does not follow the quest for wealth and power; but the creation of new knowledge makes for the high repute of a nation, alike in the days when its influence is dominant and in the more distant days when its doings shall have been recorded on the scroll of time.