Work: The Cherry Orchard Field: cherry orchard Author: Anton Chekhov Title: ACT III A drawing room separated by an arch from a ballroom. Evening. Chandelier burning. The Jewish band is heard playing in the ante room. In the ballroom they are dancing the Grand Rond. pishchik is heard calling, “Promenade à une paire.” pishchik and charlotta , trofimov and mme . ranevskaya , anya and the post-office clerk , varya and the stationmaster , and others, enter the drawing room in couples . dunyasha is in the last couple . varya weeps quietly, wiping her tears as she dances . All parade through drawing room. pishchik calling “Grand rond, balancez!” and “Les cavaliers à genoux et remerciez vos dames!” firs wearing a dress coat, brings in soda water on a tray . pishchik and trofimov enter the drawing room . Pishchik. I’m a full-blooded man; I’ve already had two strokes. Dancing’s hard work for me; but as they say, “If you run with the pack, you can bark or not, but at least wag your tail.” Still, I’m as strong as a horse. My late lamented father, who would have his joke, God rest his soul, used to say, talking about our origin, that the ancient line of the Simeonov-Pishchiks was descended from the very horse that Caligula had made a senator. (Sits down.) But the trouble is, I have no money. A hungry dog believes in nothing but meat. (Snores and wakes up at once.) It’s the same with me—I can think of nothing but money. Trofimov. You know, there is something equine about your figure. Pishchik. Well, a horse is a fine animal—one can sell a horse. Sound of billiards being played in an adjoining room. varya appears in the archway . Trofimov (teasing her). Madam Lopahina! Madam Lopahina! Varya (angrily). Mangy master! Trofimov. Yes, I am a mangy master and I’m proud of it. Varya (reflecting bitterly). Here we’ve hired musicians, and what shall we pay them with? (Exits.) Trofimov (to pishchik). If the energy you have spent during your lifetime looking for money to pay interest had gone into something else, in the end you could have turned the world upside down. Pishchik. Nietzsche, the philosopher, the greatest, most famous of men, that colossal intellect, says in his works that it is permissible to forge bank notes. Trofimov. Have you read Nietzsche? Pishchik. Well…Dashenka told me…And now I’ve got to the point where forging banknotes is about the only way out for me. …The day after tomorrow I have to pay 310 rubles—I already have 130…(Feels in his pockets. In alarm.) The money’s gone! I’ve lost my money! (Through tears.) Where’s my money? (Joy fully.) Here it is! Inside the lining…I’m all in a sweat…. Enter mme . ranevskaya and charlotta . Mme. Ranevskaya (hums the “Lezginka”). Why isn’t Leonid back yet? What is he doing in town? (To dunyasha.) Dunyasha, offer the musicians tea. Trofimov. The auction hasn’t taken place, most likely. Mme. Ranevskaya. It’s the wrong time to have the band, and the wrong time to give a dance. Well, never mind. (Sits down and hums softly.) Charlotta (hands pishchik a pack of cards). Here is a pack of cards. Think of any card you like. Pishchik. I’ve thought of one. Charlotta. Shuffle the pack now. That’s right. Give it here, my dear Mr. Pishchik. Ein, zwei, drei! Now look for it—it’s in your side pocket. Pishchik (taking the card out of his pocket). The eight of spades! Perfectly right! Just imagine! Charlotta (holding pack of cards in her hands. To trofimov). Quickly, name the top card. Trofimov. Well, let’s see—the queen of spades. Charlotta. Right! (To pishchik.) Now name the top card. Pishchik. The ace of hearts. Charlotta. Right! (Claps her hands and the pack of cards disappears.) Ah, what lovely weather it is today! (A mysterious feminine voice which seems to come from under the floor answers her) “Oh, yes, it’s magnificent weather, Madam.” Charlotta. You are my best ideal. Voice. And I find you pleasing too, Madam. Stationmaster (applauding). The lady ventriloquist, bravo! Pishchik (amazed). Just imagine! Enchanting Charlotta Ivanovna, I’m simply in love with you. Charlotta. In love? (Shrugs her shoulders.) Are you capable of love? Guter Mensch, aber schlechter Musikant [A good man but a bad musician]! Trofimov (claps pishchik on the shoulder). You old horse, you! Charlotta. Attention please! One more trick! (Takes a plaid from a chair.) Here is a very good plaid; I want to sell it. (Shaking it out.) Does anyone want to buy it? Pishchik (in amazement). Just imagine! Charlotta. Ein, zwei, drei! (Raises the plaid quickly, behind it stands anya. She curtsies, runs to her mother, embraces her, and runs back into the ballroom, amidst general enthusiasm.) Mme. Ranevskaya (applauds). Bravo! Bravo! Charlotta. Now again! Ein, zwei, drei! (Lifts the plaid; behind it stands varya bowing.) Pishchik (running after her). The rascal! What a woman, what a woman! (Exits.) Mme. Ranevskaya. And Leonid still isn’t here. What is he doing in town so long? I don’t understand. It must be all over by now. Either the estate has been sold, or the auction hasn’t taken place. Why keep us in suspense so long? Varya (trying to console her). Uncle’s bought it, I feel sure of that. Trofimov (mockingly). Oh, yes! Varya. Great-aunt sent him an authorization to buy it in her name, and to transfer the debt. She’s doing it for Anya’s sake. And I’m sure that God will help us, and Uncle will buy it. Mme. Ranevskaya. Great-aunt sent fifteen thousand to buy the estate in her name, she doesn’t trust us, but that’s not even enough to pay the interest. (Covers her face with her hands.) Today my fate will be decided, my fate— Trofimov (teasing varya). Madam Lopahina! Varya (angrily). Perpetual student! Twice already you’ve been expelled from the university. Mme. Ranevskaya. Why are you so cross, Varya? He’s teasing you about Lopahin. Well, what of it? If you want to marry Lopahin, go ahead. He’s a good man, and interesting, if you don’t want to, don’t. Nobody’s compelling you, my pet! Varya. Frankly, Mamma dear, I take this thing seriously; he’s a good man and I like him. Mme. Ranevskaya. All right then, marry him. I don’t know what you’re waiting for. Varya. But, Mamma, I can’t propose to him myself. For the last two years everyone’s been talking to me about him—talking. But he either keeps silent, or else cracks jokes. I understand; he’s growing rich, he’s absorbed in business—he has no time for me. If I had money, even a little, say, 100 rubles, I’d throw everything up and go far away—I’d go into a nunnery. Trofimov. What a blessing… Varya. A student ought to be intelligent. (Softly, with tears in her voice.) How homely you’ve grown, Petya! How old you look! (To mme. ranevskaya, with dry eyes.) But I can’t live without work, Mamma dear; I must keep busy every minute. Enter yasha . Yasha (hardly restraining his laughter). Yepihodov has broken a billiard cue! (Exits.) Varya. Why is Yepihodov here? Who allowed him to play billiards? I don’t understand these people! (Exits.) Mme. Ranevskaya. Don’t tease her, Petya. She’s unhappy enough without that. Trofimov. She bustles so—and meddles in other people’s business. All summer long she’s given Anya and me no peace. She’s afraid of a love affair between us. What business is it of hers? Besides, I’ve given no grounds for it, and I’m far from such vulgarity. We are above love. Mme. Ranevskaya. And I suppose I’m beneath love? (Anxiously.) What can be keeping Leonid? If I only knew whether the estate has been sold or not. Such a calamity seems so incredible to me that I don’t know what to think—I feel lost…. I could scream…. I could do something stupid…. Save me, Petya, tell me something, talk to me! Trofimov. Whether the estate is sold today or not, isn’t it all one? That’s all done with long ago—there’s no turning back, the path is overgrown. Calm yourself, my dear. You mustn’t deceive yourself. For once in your life you must face the truth. Mme. Ranevskaya. What truth? You can see the truth, you can tell it from falsehood, but I seem to have lost my eyesight, I see nothing. You settle every great problem so boldly, but tell me, my dear boy, isn’t it because you’re young, because you don’t yet know what one of your problems means in terms of suffering? You look ahead fearlessly, but isn’t it because you don’t see and don’t expect anything dreadful, because life is still hidden from your young eyes? You’re bolder, more honest, more profound than we are, but think hard, show just a bit of magnanimity, spare me. After all, I was born here, my father and mother lived here, and my grandfather; I love this house. Without the cherry orchard, my life has no meaning for me, and if it really