continue..
of Beatrice. In the last cantos (xxix–xxxiii) of the Purgatorio we are already in the world of the Paradiso. But in between these episodes is the narrative of the ascent of the Mount, with meetings, visions, and philosophical expositions, all important, and all difficult for the uninstructed reader who finds it less exciting than the continuous phantasmagoria of the Inferno. The allegory in the Inferno was easy to swallow or ignore, because we could, so to speak, grasp the concrete end of it, its solidification into imagery; but as we ascend from Hell to Heaven we are more and more required to grasp the whole from idea to image. Here I must make a diversion, before tackling a specifically philosophical passage of the Purgatorio, concerning the nature of Belief. I wish merely to indicate certain tentative conclusions of my own, which might affect one’s reading of the Purgatorio. Dante’s debt to St. Thomas Aquinas, like his debt (a much smaller one) to Virgil, can be easily exaggerated; for it must not be forgotten that Dante read and made use of other great mediaeval philosophers as well. Nevertheless, the question of how much Dante took from Aquinas and how much from elsewhere is one which has been settled by others and is not relevant to my present essay. But the question of what Dante “believed” is always relevant. It would not matter, if the world were divided between those persons who are capable of taking poetry simply for what it is and those who cannot take it at all; if so, there would be no need to talk about this question to the former and no use in talking about it to the latter. But most of us are somewhat impure and apt to confuse issues: hence the justification of writing books about books, in the hope of straightening things out. My point is that you cannot afford to ignore Dante’s philosophical and theological beliefs, or to skip the passages which express them most clearly; but that on the other hand you are not called upon to believe them yourself. It is wrong to think that there are parts of the Divine Comedy which are of interest only to Catholics or to mediaevalists. For there is a difference (which here I hardly do more than assert) between philosophical belief and poetic assent. I am not sure that there is not as great a difference between philosophical belief and scientific belief; but that is a difference only now beginning to appear, and certainly inapposite to the thirteenth century. In reading Dante you must enter the world of thirteenth-century Catholicism: which is not the world of modern Catholicism, as his world of physics is not the world of modern physics. You are not called upon to believe what Dante believed, for your belief will not give you a groat’s worth more of understanding and appreciation; but you are called upon more and more to understand it. If you can read poetry as poetry, you will “believe” in Dante’s theology exactly as you believe in the physical reality of his journey; that is, you suspend both belief and disbelief. I will not deny that it may be in practice easier for a Catholic to grasp the meaning, in many places, than for the ordinary agnostic; but that is not because the Catholic believes, but because he has been instructed. It is a matter of knowledge and ignorance, not of belief or scepticism. The vital matter is that Dante’s poem is a whole; that you must in the end come to understand every part in order to understand any part. Furthermore, we can make a distinction between what Dante believes as a poet and what he believed as a man. Practically, it is hardly likely that even so great a poet as Dante could have composed the Comedy merely with understanding and without belief; but his private belief becomes a different thing in becoming poetry. It is interesting to hazard the suggestion that this is truer of Dante than of any other philosophical poet. With Goethe, for instance, I often feel too acutely “this is what Goethe the man believed,” instead of merely entering into a world which Goethe has created; with Lucretius also; less with the Bhagavad-Gita, which is the next greatest philosophical poem to the Divine Comedy within my experience. That is the advantage of a coherent traditional system of dogma and morals like the Catholic: it stands apart, for understanding and assent even without belief, from the single individual who propounds it. Goethe always arouses in me a strong sentiment of disbelief in what he believes: Dante does not. I believe that this is because Dante is the purer poet, not because I have more sympathy with Dante the man than Goethe the man. We are not to take Dante for Aquinas or Aquinas for Dante. It would be a grievous error in psychology. The belief attitude of a man reading the Summa must be different from that of a man reading Dante, even when it is the same man, and that man a Catholic. It is not necessary to have read the Summa (which usually means, in practice, reading some handbook) in order to understand Dante. But it is necessary to read the philosophical passages of Dante with the humility of a person visiting a new world, who admits that every part is essential to the whole. What is necessary to appreciate the poetry of the Purgatorio is not belief, but suspension of belief. Just as much effort is required of any modern person to accept Dante’s allegorical method, as is required of the agnostic to accept his theology. When I speak of understanding, I do not mean merely knowledge of books or words, any more than I mean belief: I mean a state of mind in which one sees certain beliefs, as the order of the deadly sins, in which treachery and pride are greater than lust, and despair the greatest, as possible, so that we suspend our judgment altogether. In the xvith Canto of the Purgatorio we meet Marco Lombardo, who discourses at some length on the Freedom of the Will, and on the Soul: Poem ```Esce di mano a lui, che la vagheggia prima che sia, a giusa di fanciulla che piangendo e ridendo pargoleggia, l’anima semplicetta, che sa nulla, salvo che, mossa da lieto fattore, volentier torna a ciò che la trastulla. Di picciol bene in pria sente sapore; quivi s’inganna, e retro ad esso corre, se guida o fren non torce suo amore. Onde convenne legge per fren porre; convenne regge aver, che discernesse della vera cittade almen la torre.``` From the hands of Him who loves her before she is, there issues like a little child that plays, with weeping and langhter, the simple soul, that knows nothing except that, come from the hands of a glad creator, she turns willingly to everything that delights her. First she tastes the flavour of a trifling good; then is beguiled, and pursues it, if neither guide nor check withhold her. Therefore laws were needed as a curb; a ruler was needed, who should at least see afar the tower of the true City. Later (Canto xvii) it is Virgil himself who instructs Dante in the nature of Love: Poem ```“Nè creator nè creatura mai,” cominciò ei, “figiuol, fu senza amore, o naturale o d’animo; e tu il sai. Lo natural è sempre senza errore, ma l’altro puote errar per malo obbietto, o per poco o per troppo di vigore. Mentre ch’ egli è ne’ primi ben diretto, e ne’ secondi sè stesso misura, esser non può cagion di mal diletto; ma, quando al mal si torce, o con più cura o con men che non dee corre nel bene, contra il fattore adopra sua fattura. Quinci comprender puoi ch’ esser conviene amor sementa in voi d’ ogni virtute, e d’ ogni operazion che merta pene.``` He began: “neither Creator, nor creature, my son, was ever without love, either natural or rational: and you know it. The natural is always without error; but the other may err through mistaking the object, or through excess or deficiency of force. While it is directed towards the primal goods, and in the secondary moderates itself, it cannot be the cause of delight of sin; but when turned to evil, or hurries towards the good with more or less solicitude than is right, then the creature works against the Creator. Accordingly you may understand how Love must be the seed in you both of every virtue and of every act that merits punishment.” I have quoted these two passages at some length, because they are of the sort that a reader might be inclined to skip, thinking that they are only for scholars, not for readers of poetry, or thinking that it is necessary to have studied the philosophy underlying them. It is not necessary to have traced the descent of this