continue..
phenomena as the sequence of eclipses of the sun and of the moon, was made by the ancient Chaldeans. Later the Greeks, whose passion for geometry was almost a rule of life, began to describe the heavens geometrically as they saw and we see the heavens. The natural, the almost inevitable, consequence was that, because the Greek observers described accurately what they saw, they made the earth the centre of the universe. (Here let me say that these old Greek descriptions remain as accurate as man could make them: where we part company from the Greeks is in the assumption, obvious but untrue, that the phenomena require the earth to be the centre of all things.) Yet nearly three centuries before the Christian era the Greek philosopher, Aristarchus of Samos, was an early astronomical heretic—he groped towards a heliocentric theory of the universe: with him it was a speculation, an idea, based upon an inference that the sun is seven times as large as the earth, at a time when there was little knowledge of the size of the earth and less of the size of the sun. His speculation remained in the region of fancy: the traditional trust in Aristotle maintained the acceptance of the old geocentric theory; there were not enough facts to achieve the tragedy of killing a theory. In their turn the theologians of the West, conservative as are all orders of organized priesthood, made the geocentric theory an article of orthodox faith: and for centuries the universe, thus theocratic in matters outside religion and faith, could be described only in the vocabulary of the schoolmen in theology. A Catholic monk, Copernicus, opened the path to a change of estimate, though the innocent dedication of his book to the Pope saved his name from contumely: had he lived, it might not have saved him from the fate of Galilei. Gradually, almost painfully, methods systematized from facts killed the old theory: and the inspired guess of Aristarchus passed from the range of happy surmise into a knowledge of the solar system of which even the most exuberant imagination had not dared to dream. My second illustration is taken from a more speculative range of thought—more speculative because less openly amenable to observation and to experiment. Many of you doubtless are familiar with the recent predominance of the word “atom” in scientific discussions. There was a time, even now easily recalled, when the use of the word was an implicit declaration that finality had been attained: human knowledge could not penetrate the indivisible. In the interval, a school of mathematical physicists has devoted itself to the study of the atom: its apostles have concluded that, mathematically, an atom is a universe in itself, a sort of solar system with recurrent revolutions of its members that can be subjected to calculation. Different atoms, in present speculation, are different universes which, under the compulsion of electric bombardment, may lose some of their constituents and, in doing so, become a changed universe. But mark the history. The atom was the irresoluble element by which Democritus, four centuries before the Christian era, explained the phenomena of matter to one of the most critical nations of thinkers the world has known: the atom became the explanation of animate, as well as of inanimate, nature. The culmination of that ancient theory came in the doctrine of Epicurus; and its fine exposition by Lucretius is nearly two thousand years old. In varying forms, with changing adaptations, it was tried, was found wanting, was driven from pillar to post, until it seemed to have reached a secure haven in chemistry. Where is the atomic theory now? Thirty years ago chemists were shocked by the resolution of the atom, the absolutely irresoluble element; now the more elusive electron has taken the field. The scientific world is in pursuit of the electron: Sir Ernest Rutherford is battering the atom by an electric attack under staggering voltage; and the negative electrons thus violently expelled from the domain of the positive nucleus are realizing the speculative guess made, centuries ago, by Hipparchus, that atoms could lose portions of themselves and thereby change their essence. Sir Joseph Thomson, the brilliant master of Rutherford, goes further than his pupil and suggests that the electron itself is a universe, perhaps another mathematical solar system; and only two short months ago the distinguished son of Sir Joseph Thomson was able, as the result of investigations, to compare the size of the electron and that of the atom, neither of which has been seen by man. Physical speculation is outrunning its mathematics: but, as so often before, the return to mathematics is ever made as soon as there are facts amenable to calculation. The facts remain, and the calculations based on the facts remain. Theories spring up and flourish while they conform to the facts and the calculations: they wilt, when new facts come that demand requirements which the theories cannot supply. It resembles the historic cult in the Arician grove: an old theory of yesterday is forsaken for a new one of to-day, itself to be forsaken to-morrow, like Poem ```The priest who slew the slayer And shall himself be slain.``` What part does the science of mathematics play in all this scientific tornado? And, indeed, what does the science include, and what may it claim to achieve? Broadly speaking, as soon as any progressive subject attains a stage where its phenomena admit of some kind of measurement, then and there the science of calculation can begin to deal with the measurements: thereafter the subject can be assisted by mathematics. Calculations can predict some results that must ensue from combinations of facts, and so can render some experiments superfluous. Calculations can even anticipate experiment and observation: such has been the case with Hamilton’s conical refraction in optics and with the electric waves which first emerged from the mathematical labours of Maxwell and Hertz. Calculations can utilize facts in nonexperimental fashion and produce results that lay concealed. But no calculation can produce results that do not belong to the range of the subject-matter: thus astrology, and alchemy, and necromancy, bound to be scientific failures, were and are successful frauds owing to the undying gullibility of human nature in its wistful yearning for the unknown and the unattainable. Briefly, the science of mathematics cannot be a substitute for essential experiment: but it can show how experiments and observations, duly systematized, can be elucidated so as to discriminate between what is principle and what is detailed consequence of principle. Sometimes it can lead, though its guidance is unrecognized, to simple devices which economize labour to an extent almost beyond credibility. Thus some of you know the slide-rule by practice; many of you will know it by name; but I am not sure that every student, or even every professor, would be prepared to furnish a reasoned statement justifying the various processes for which that admirable instrument is used. Yet it can be regarded as a compendium of logarithms, without tables and without any necessity for calculation: and logarithms are but a means of turning abstruse multiplication into simple addition and abstruse division into simple subtraction. Again, your Russian peasant usually is illiterate: but he will make out his invoice for wool, or furs, or timber, or corn and rye, as accurately as your western clerk by surprisingly simple means that mark a limit of his attainments. He can multiply by the number two, but no other number; he can divide by the number two, but by no other number; and he can perform simple addition. By these three operations he effects all that he needs for business transactions, and he effects it accurately. But he could not give you one word of explanation of a process which to him has become a habit; and if you explained the mathematical argument that justifies his action, he could not understand one word of the explanation. Does his process strike you as wonderful? It is no more wonderful, it is less wonderful, than the process employed by the smallest shopkeeper. Your Welsh shopkeeper calculates in what mathematicians call the scale of four for farthings, in the scale of twelve for pence, in the scale of twenty for shillings; he adds and he multiplies in the scale of ten. But he knows nothing of numerical scales; and probably he would not understand a word of reasoned explanation of such scales. The Russian peasant actually calculates, in essence though not in obvious form, in the scale of two: and some kind though unknown genius, in a dim and distant past, has turned the simple mathematics of the scale of two into the Russian peasant’s process of arithmetic. And if such is the fact in simple matters, you need not be surprised if the science of mathematics is used to high economic purpose where, at some stage, its calculations are obtrusively significant. Another couple of examples will justify such a statement. At the