continue..
of the new ones and the extent of their validity. In the first pages of our book we compared the role of an investigator to that of a detective who, after gathering the requisite facts, finds the right solution by pure thinking. In one essential this comparison must be regarded as highly superficial. Both in life and in detective novels the crime is given. The detective must look for letters, fingerprints, bullets, guns, but at least he knows that a murder has been committed. This is not so for a scientist. It should not be difficult to imagine someone who knows absolutely nothing about electricity, since all the ancients lived happily enough without any knowledge of it. Let this man be given metal, gold foil, bottles, hard-rubber rod, flannel, in short, all the material required for performing our three experiments. He may be a very cultured person, but he will probably put wine into the bottles, use the flannel for cleaning, and never once entertain the idea of doing the things we have described. For the detective the crime is given, the problem formulated: who killed Cock Robin? The scientist must, at least in part, commit his own crime, as well as carry out the investigation. Moreover, his task is not to explain just one case, but all phenomena which have happened or may still happen. In the introduction of the concept of fluids we see the influence of those mechanical ideas which attempt to explain everything by substances and simple forces acting between them. To see whether the mechanical point of view can be applied to the description of electrical phenomena, we must consider the following problem. Two small spheres are given, both with an electric charge, that is, both carrying an excess of one electric fluid. We know that the spheres will either attract or repel each other. But does the force depend only on the distance, and if so, how? The simplest guess seems to be that this force depends on the distance in the same way as gravitational force, which diminishes, say, to one-ninth of its former strength if the distance is made three times as great. The experiments performed by Coulomb showed that this law is really valid. A hundred years after Newton discovered the law of gravitation, Coulomb found a similar dependence of electrical force on distance. The two major differences between Newton’s law and Coulomb’s law are: gravitational attraction is always present, while electric forces exist only if the bodies possess electric charges. In the gravitational case there is only attraction, but electric forces may either attract or repel. There arises here the same question which we considered in connection with heat. Are the electrical fluids weightless substances or not? In other words, is the weight of a piece of metal the same whether neutral or charged? Our scales show no difference. We conclude that the electric fluids are also members of the family of weightless substances. Further progress in the theory of electricity requires the introduction of two new concepts. Again we shall avoid rigorous definitions, using instead analogies with concepts already familiar. We remember how essential it was for an understanding of the phenomena of heat to distinguish between heat itself and temperature. It is equally important here to distinguish between electric potential and electric charge. The difference between the two concepts is made clear by the analogy: Electric potential|−|Temperature Electric charge|−|Heat Electric potential − Temperature Electric charge − Heat Two conductors, for example two spheres of different size, may have the same electric charge, that is the same excess of one electric fluid, but the potential will be different in the two cases, being higher for the smaller and lower for the larger sphere. The electric fluid will have greater density and thus be more compressed on the small conductor. Since the repulsive forces must increase with the density, the tendency of the charge to escape will be greater in the case of the smaller sphere than in that of the larger. This tendency of charge to escape from a conductor is a direct measure of its potential. In order to show clearly the difference between charge and potential we shall formulate a few sentences describing the behavior of heated bodies, and the corresponding sentences concerning charged conductors.Heat|Electricity ---|--- Two bodies, initially at different temperatures, reach the same temperature after some time if brought into contact.|Two insulated conductors, initially at different electric potentials, very quickly reach the same potential if brought into contact. Equal quantities of heat produce different changes of temperature in two bodies if their heat capacities are different.|Equal amounts of electric charge produce different changes of electric potential in two bodies if their electrical capacities are different. A thermometer in contact with a body indicates—by the length of its mercury column—its own temperature and therefore the temperature of the body.|An electroscope in contact with a conductor indicates—by the separation of the gold leaves—its own electric potential and therefore the electric potential of the conductor. But this analogy must not be pushed too far. An example shows the differences as well as the similarities. If a hot body is brought into contact with a cold one, the heat flows from the hotter to the colder. On the other hand suppose that we have two insulated conductors having equal but opposite charges, one positive and the other negative. The two are at different potentials. By convention we regard the potential corresponding to a negative charge as lower than that corresponding to a positive charge. If the two conductors are brought together or connected by a wire, it follows from the theory of electric fluids that they will show no charge and thus no difference of electric potential at all. We must imagine a “flow” of electric charge from one conductor to the other during the short time in which the potential difference is equalized. But how? Does the positive fluid flow to the negative body, or the negative fluid to the positive body? In the material presented here we have no basis for deciding between these two alternatives. We can assume either of the two possibilities, or that the flow is simultaneous in both directions. It is only a matter of adopting a convention, and no significance can be attached to the choice, for we know no method of deciding the question experimentally. Further development leading to a much more profound theory of electricity gave an answer to this problem, which is quite meaningless when formulated in terms of the simple and primitive theory of electric fluids. Here we shall simply adopt the following mode of expression. The electric fluid flows from the conductor having the higher poten- tial to that having the lower. In the case of our two conductors the electricity thus flows from positive to negative. This expression is only a matter of convention and is at this point quite arbitrary. The whole difficulty indicates that the analogy between heat and electricity is by no means complete. We have seen the possibility of adapting the mechanical view to a description of the elementary facts of electrostatics. The same is possible in the case of magnetic phenomena. The Magnetic Fluids. We shall proceed here in the same manner as before, starting with very simple facts and then seeking their theoretical explanation. 1. We have two long bar magnets, one suspended freely at its center, the other held in the hand. The ends of the two magnets are brought together in such a way that a strong attraction is noticed between them. This can always be done. If no attraction results we must turn the magnet and try the other end. Something will hap- pen if the bars are magnetized at all. The ends of the magnets are called their poles. To continue with the experiment we move the pole of the magnet held in the hand along the other magnet. A decrease in the attraction is noticed and when the pole reaches the middle of the suspended magnet there is no evidence of any force at all. If the pole is moved further in the same direction a repulsion is observed, attaining its greatest strength at the second pole of the hanging magnet. 2. The above experiment suggests another. Each magnet has two poles. Can we not isolate one of them? The idea is very simple: just break a magnet into two equal parts. We have seen that there is no force between the pole of one magnet and the middle of the other. But the result of actually breaking a magnet is surprising and unexpected. If we repeat the experiment described under (1), with only half a magnet suspended, the results are exactly the same as before! Where there was no trace of magnetic force previously, there is now a strong pole. How are these facts to be explained? We can attempt to pattern a theory of magnetism after the theory of electric fluids. This is