continue..
tap of his pipe, and a shower of little sparks, they shied round and scampered. A bat went fluttering past, uttering its almost inaudible “chip, chip.” Ashurst held out his hand; on the upturned palm he could feel the dew. Suddenly from overhead he heard little burring boys’ voices, little thumps of boots thrown down, and another voice, crisp and soft—the girl’s putting them to bed, no doubt; and nine clear words: “No, Rick, you can’t have the cat in bed”; then came a skirmish of giggles and gurgles, a soft slap, a laugh so low and pretty that it made him shiver a little. A blowing sound, and the glim of the candle which was fingering the dusk above went out; silence reigned. Ashurst withdrew into the room and sat down; his knee pained him, and his soul felt gloomy. “You go to the kitchen,” he said; “I’m going to bed.” For Ashurst the wheel of slumber was wont to turn noiseless and slick and swift, but though he seemed sunk in sleep when his companion came up, he was really wide awake; and long after Garton, smothered in the other bed of that low-roofed room, was worshiping darkness with his upturned nose, he heard the owls. Barring the discomfort of his knee, it was not unpleasant—the cares of life did not loom large in night watches for this young man. In fact he had none; just enrolled a barrister, with literary aspirations, the world before him, no father or mother, and four hundred a year of his own. Did it matter where he went, what he did, or when he did it? His bed, too, was hard, and this preserved him from fever. He lay, sniffing the scent of the night which drifted into the low room through the open casement close to his head. Except for a definite irritation with his friend, natural when you have tramped with a man for three days, Ashurst’s memories and visions that sleepless night were kindly and wistful and exciting. One vision, specially clear and unreasonable, for he had not even been conscious of noting it, was the face of the youth cleaning the gun; its intent, stolid, yet startled uplook at the kitchen doorway quickly shifted to the girl carrying the cider jug. This red, blue-eyed, light-lashed, tow-haired face stuck as firmly in his memory as the girl’s own face, so dewy and simple. But at last, in the square of darkness through the uncurtained casement, he saw day coming, and heard one hoarse and sleepy caw. Then followed silence, dead as ever, till the song of a blackbird, not properly awake, adventured into the hush. And, from staring at the framed brightening light, Ashurst fell asleep. Next day his knee was badly swollen; the walking tour was obviously over. Garton, due back in London on the morrow, departed at midday with an ironical smile which left a scar of irritation—healed the moment his loping figure vanished round the corner of the steep lane. All day Ashurst rested his knee, in a green-painted wooden chair on the patch of grass by the yew-tree porch, where the sunlight distilled the scent of stocks and gillyflowers, and a ghost of scent from the flowering-currant bushes. Beatifically he smoked, dreamed, watched. A farm in spring is all birth—young things coming out of bud and shell, and human beings watching over the process with faint excitement feeding and tending what has been born. So still the young man sat that a mother goose, with stately cross-footed waddle, brought her six yellow-necked grey-backed goslings to strop their little beaks against the grass blades at his feet. Now and again Mrs. Narracombe or the girl Megan would come and ask if he wanted anything, and he would smile and say: “Nothing, thanks. It’s splendid here.” Towards tea-time they came out together, bearing a long poultice of some dark stuff in a bowl, and after a long and solemn scrutiny of his swollen knee, bound it on. When they were gone, he thought of the girl’s soft “Oh!”—of her pitying eyes, and the little wrinkle in her brow. And again he felt that unreasoning irritation against his departed friend, who had talked such rot about her. When she brought out his tea, he said: “How did you like my friend, Megan?” She forced down her upper lip, as if afraid that to smile was not polite. “He was a funny gentleman; he made us laugh. I think he is very clever.” “What did he say to make you laugh?” “He said I was a daughter of the bards. What are they?” “Welsh poets, who lived hundreds of years ago.” “Why am I their daughter, please?” “He meant that you were the sort of girl they sang about.” She wrinkled her brows. “I think he likes to joke. Am I?” “Would you believe me, if I told you?” “Oh, yes.” “Well, I think he was right.” She smiled. And Ashurst thought: “You are a pretty thing!” “He said, too, that Joe was a Saxon type. What would that be?” “Which is Joe? With the blue eyes and red face?” “Yes. My uncle’s nephew.” “Not your cousin, then?” “No.” “Well, he meant that Joe was like the men who came over to England about fourteen hundred years ago, and conquered it.” “Oh! I know about them; but is he?” “Garton’s crazy about that sort of thing; but I must say Joe does look a bit Early Saxon.” “Yes.” That “yes” tickled Ashurst. It was so crisp and graceful, so conclusive, and politely acquiescent in what was evidently Greek to her. “He said that all the other boys were regular gypsies. He should not have said that. My aunt laughed, but she didn’t like it, of course, and my cousins were angry. Uncle was a farmer—farmers are not gypsies. It is wrong to hurt people.” Ashurst wanted to take her hand and give it a squeeze, but he only answered: “Quite right, Megan. By the way, I heard you putting the little ones to bed last night.” She flushed a little. “Please to drink your tea—it is getting cold. Shall I get you some fresh?” “Do you ever have time to do anything for yourself?” “Oh, yes.” “I’ve been watching, but I haven’t seen it yet.” She wrinkled her brows in a puzzled frown, and her colour deepened. When she was gone, Ashurst thought: “Did she think I was chaffing her? I wouldn’t for the world!” He was at that age when to some men “Beauty’s a flower,” as the poet says, and inspires in them the thoughts of chivalry. Never very conscious of his surroundings, it was some time before he was aware that the youth whom Garton had called “a Saxon type” was standing outside the stable door; and a fine bit of colour he made in his soiled brown velvet cords, muddy gaiters, and blue shirt; red-armed, red-faced, the sun turning his hair from tow to flax; immovably stolid, persistent, unsmiling he stood. Then, seeing Ashurst looking at him, he crossed the yard at that gait of the young countryman always ashamed not to be slow and heavy-dwelling on each leg, and disappeared round the end of the house towards the kitchen entrance. A chill came over Ashurst’s mood. Clods! With all the good will in the world, how impossible to get on terms with them! And yet—see that girl! Her shoes were split, her hands rough; but—what was it? Was it really her Celtic blood, as Garton had said?—she was a lady born, a jewel, though probably she could do no more than just read and write! The elderly, clean-shaven man he had seen last night in the kitchen had come into the yard with a dog, driving the cows to their milking. Ashurst saw that he was lame. “You’ve got some good ones there!” The lame man’s face brightened. He had the upward look in his eyes which prolonged suffering often brings. “Yeas; they’m praaper buties; gude milkers tu.” “I bet they are.” “’Ope as yure leg’s better, zurr.” “Thank you, it’s getting on.” The lame man touched his own: “I know what ’tes, meself; ’tes a main worritin’ thing, the knee. I’ve a ’ad mine bad this ten year.” Ashurst made the sound of sympathy which comes so readily from those who have an independent income, and the lame man smiled again. “Mustn’t complain, though—they mighty near ’ad it off.” “Ho!” “Yeas; an’ compared with what ’twas, ’tis almost so gude as nu.” “They’ve put a bandage of splendid stuff on mine.” “The maid she picks et. She’m a gude maid wi’ the flowers. There’s folks zeem to know the healin’ in things. My mother was a rare one for that. ’Ope as yu’ll zune be better, zurr. Goo ahn, therr!” Ashurst smiled. “Wi’ the flowers!” A flower herself. That evening, after his supper of cold duck, junket, and cider, the girl came in.