continue..
I ain’t got de time to waste on no more fool talk wid you. I’se gwine away from heah dis secon’. (He reaches in under the throne and pulls out an expensive Panama hat with a bright multicolored band and sets it jauntily on his head) So long, white man! (With a grin) See you in jail sometime, maybe! Smithers. Not me, you won’t. Well, I wouldn’t be in yer bloody boots for no bloomin’ money, but ’ere’s wishin’ yer luck just the same. Jones (contemptuously). You’re de frightenedest man evah I see! I tells you I’se safe’s ’f I was in New York City. It takes dem niggers from now to dark to git up de nerve to start somethin’. By dat time, I’se got a head start dey never kotch up wid. Smithers (maliciously). Give my regards to any ghosts yer meets up with. Jones (grinning). If dat ghost got money, I’ll tell him never ha’nt you less’n he wants to lose it. Smithers (flattered). Garn! (Then curiously) Ain’t yer takin’ no luggage with yer? Jones. I travels light when I wants to move fast. And I got tinned grub buried on de edge o’ de forest. (Boastfully) Now say dat I don’t look ahead an’ use my brains! (With a wide, liberal gesture) I will all dat’s left in de palace to you—and you better grab all you kin sneak away wid befo’ dey gits here. Smithers (gratefully). Righto—and thanks ter yer. (As jones walks to ward the door in rear—cautioningly) Say! Look ’ere, you ain’t goin’ out that way, are yer? Jones. Does you think I’d slink out de back door like a common nigger? I’se Emperor yit, ain’t I? And de Emperor Jones leaves de way he comes, and dat black trash don’t dare stop him—not yit, leastways. (He stops for a moment in the doorway, listening to the far-off but insistent beat of the tom-tom) Listen to dat roll call, will you? Must be mighty big drum carry dat far. (Then with a laugh) Well, if dey ain’t no whole brass band to see me off, I sho’ got de drum part of it. So long, white man. (He puts his hands in his pockets and with studied carelessness, whistling a tune, he saunters out of the doorway and off to the left.) Smithers (looks after him with a puzzled admiration). ’E’s got ’is bloomin’ nerve with ’im, s’elp me! (Then angrily) Ho—the bleedin’ nigger—puttin’ on ’is bloody airs! I ’opes they nabs ’im an’ gives ’im what’s what!