continue..
(after a short pause). You are an extraordinarily independent man, Thomas. Have you given no thought to the consequences this may have for yourself? Dr. Stockmann. Consequences?—for me? Peter Stockmann. For you and yours, yes. Dr. Stockmann. What the deuce do you mean? Peter Stockmann. I believe I have always behaved in a brotherly way to you—have always been ready to oblige or to help you? Dr. Stockmann. Yes, you have, and I am grateful to you for it. Peter Stockmann. There is no need. Indeed, to some extent I was forced to do so—for my own sake. I always hoped that, if I helped to improve your financial position, I should be able to keep some check on you. Dr. Stockmann. What!! Then it was only for your own sake—! Peter Stockmann. Up to a certain point, yes. It is painful for a man in an official position to have his nearest relative compromising himself time after time. Dr. Stockmann. And do you consider that I do that? Peter Stockmann. Yes, unfortunately, you do, without even being aware of it. You have a restless, pugnacious, rebellious disposition. And then there is that disastrous propensity of yours to want to write about every sort of possible and impossible thing. The moment an idea comes into your head, you must needs go and write a newspaper article or a whole pamphlet about it. Dr. Stockmann. Well, but is it not the duty of a citizen to let the public share in any new ideas he may have? Peter Stockmann. Oh, the public doesn’t require any new ideas. The public is best served by the good, old-established ideas it already has. Dr. Stockmann. And that is your honest opinion? Peter Stockmann. Yes, and for once I must talk frankly to you. Hitherto I have tried to avoid doing so, because I know how irritable you are; but now I must tell you the truth, Thomas. You have no conception what an amount of harm you do yourself by your impetuosity. You complain of the authorities, you even complain of the government—you are always pulling them to pieces; you insist that you have been neglected and persecuted. But what else can such a cantankerous man as you expect? Dr. Stockmann. What next! Cantankerous, am I? Peter Stockmann. Yes, Thomas, you are an extremely cantankerous man to work with—I know that to my cost. You disregard everything that you ought to have consideration for. You seem completely to forget that it is me you have to thank for your appointment here as medical officer to the Baths— Dr. Stockmann. I was entitled to it as a matter of course!—I and nobody else! I was the first person to see that the town could be made into a flourishing watering place, and I was the only one who saw it at that time. I had to fight singlehanded in support of the idea for many years; and I wrote and wrote— Peter Stockmann. Undoubtedly. But things were not ripe for the scheme then—though, of course, you could not judge of that in your out-of-the-way corner up north. But as soon as the opportune moment came I—and the others—took the matter into our hands— Dr. Stockmann. Yes, and made this mess of all my beautiful plan. It is pretty obvious now what clever fellows you were! Peter Stockmann. To my mind the whole thing only seems to mean that you are seeking another outlet for your combativeness. You want to pick a quarrel with your superiors—an old habit of yours. You cannot put up with any authority over you. You look askance at anyone who occupies a superior official position; you regard him as a personal enemy, and then any stick is good enough to beat him with. But now I have called your attention to the fact that the town’s interests are at stake—and, incidentally, my own too. And therefore I must tell you, Thomas, that you will find me inexorable with regard to what I am about to require you to do. Dr. Stockmann. And what is that? Peter Stockmann. As you have been so indiscreet as to speak of this delicate matter to outsiders, despite the fact that you ought to have treated it as entirely official and confidential, it is obviously impossible to hush it up now. All sorts of rumors will get about directly, and everybody who has a grudge against us will take care to embellish these rumors. So it will be necessary for you to refute them publicly. Dr. Stockmann. I! How? I don’t understand. Peter Stockmann. What we shall expect is that, after making further investigations, you will come to the conclusion that the matter is not by any means as dangerous or as critical as you imagined in the first instance. Dr. Stockmann. Oho!—so that is what you expect! Peter Stockmann. And, what is more, we shall expect you to make public profession of your confidence in the Committee and in their readiness to consider fully and conscientiously what steps may be necessary to remedy any possible defects. Dr. Stockmann. But you will never be able to do that by patching and tinkering at it—never! Take my word for it, Peter; I mean what I say, as deliberately and emphatically as possible. Peter Stockmann. As an officer under the Committee, you have no right to any individual opinion. Dr. Stockmann (amazed). No right? Peter Stockmann. In your official capacity, no. As a private person, it is quite another matter. But as a subordinate member of the staff of the Baths, you have no right to express any opinion which runs contrary to that of your superiors. Dr. Stockmann. This is too much! I, a doctor, a man of science, have no right to—! Peter Stockmann. The matter in hand is not simply a scientific one. It is a complicated matter, and has its economic as well as its technical side. Dr. Stockmann. I don’t care what it is! I intend to be free to express my opinion on any subject under the sun. Peter Stockmann. As you please—but not on any subject concerning the Baths. That we forbid. Dr. Stockmann (shouting). You forbid—! You! A pack of— Peter Stockmann. I forbid it—I, your chief; and if I forbid it, you have to obey. Dr. Stockmann (controlling himself). Peter—if you were not my brother— Petra (throwing open the door). Father, you shan’t stand this! Mrs. Stockmann (coming in after her). Petra, Petra! Peter Stockmann. Oh, so you have been eavesdropping. Mrs. Stockmann. You were talking so loud, we couldn’t help— Petra. Yes, I was listening. Peter Stockmann. Well, after all, I am very glad— Dr. Stockmann (going up to him). You were saying something about forbidding and obeying? Peter Stockmann. You obliged me to take that tone with you. Dr. Stockmann. And so I am to give myself the lie, publicly? Peter Stockmann. We consider it absolutely necessary that you should make some such public statement as I have asked for. Dr. Stockmann. And if I do not—obey? Peter Stockmann. Then we shall publish a statement ourselves to reassure the public. Dr. Stockmann. Very well; but in that case I shall use my pen against you. I stick to what I have said; I will show that I am right and that you are wrong. And what will you do then? Peter Stockmann. Then I shall not be able to prevent your being dismissed. Dr. Stockmann. What—? Petra. Father—dismissed! Mrs. Stockmann. Dismissed! Peter Stockmann. Dismissed from the staff of the Baths. I shall be obliged to propose that you shall immediately be given notice, and shall not be allowed any further participation in the Baths’ affairs. Dr. Stockmann. You would dare to do that! Peter Stockmann. It is you that are playing the daring game. Petra. Uncle, that is a shameful way to treat a man like father! Mrs. Stockmann. Do hold your tongue, Petra! Peter Stockmann (looking at petra). Oh, so we volunteer our opinions already, do we? Of course. (To mrs. stockmann.) Katherine, I imagine you are the most sensible person in this house. Use any influence you may have over your husband, and make him see what this will entail for his family as well as— Dr. Stockmann. My family is my own concern and nobody else’s! Peter Stockmann. —for his own family, as I was saying, as well as for the town he lives in. Dr. Stockmann. It is I who have the real good of the town at heart! I want to lay bare the defects that sooner or later must come to the light of day. I will show whether I love my native town. Peter Stockmann. You, who in your blind obstinacy want to cut off the most important source of the town’s welfare? Dr. Stockmann. The source is poisoned, man! Are you mad? We are making our living by retailing filth and corruption! The whole of our flourishing municipal life