continue..
a glance and a clink from the sentinel sends her flying. Most of what she sees she has seen before: the vineyard at the back, with the old wine-press and a cart among the vines; the door close on her right leading to the street entry; the landlord’s best sideboard, now in full action for dinner, further back on the same side; the fireplace on the other side with a couch near it; another door, leading to the inner rooms, between it and the vineyard; and the table in the middle set out with a repast of Milanese risotto, cheese, grapes, bread, olives, and a big wickered flask of red wine. The landlord, giuseppe grandi, she knows well. He is a swarthy vivacious shrewdly cheerful black-curled bullet-headed grinning lit tle innkeeper of 40. Naturally an excellent host, he is in the highest spirits this evening at his good fortune in having as his guest the French commander to protect him against the license of the troops. He actually sports a pair of gold earrings which would otherwise have been hidden carefully under the wine-press with his little equipment of silver plate. napoleon, sitting facing her on the further side of the table, she sees for the first time. He is working hard, partly at his meal, which he has discovered how to dispatch in ten minutes by attacking all the courses simultaneously (this practice is the beginning of his downfall), and partly at a military map on which he from time to time marks the position of the forces by taking a grape skin from his mouth and planting it on the map with his thumb like a wafer. There is no revolutionary untidiness about his dress or person; but his elbow has displaced most of the dishes and glasses; and his long hair trails into the risotto when he forgets it and leans more intently over the map. Giuseppe. Will your excellency— Napoleon (intent on his map, but cramming himself mechanically with his left hand). Don’t talk. I’m busy. Giuseppe (with perfect good humour). Excellency: I obey. Napoleon. Some red ink. Giuseppe. Alas! excellency, there is none. Napoleon (with Corsican facetiousness). Kill something and bring me its blood. Giuseppe (grinning). There is nothing but your excellency’s horse, the sentinel, the lady upstairs, and my wife. Napoleon. Kill your wife. Giuseppe. Willingly, your excellency; but unhappily I am not strong enough. She would kill me. Napoleon. That will do equally well. Giuseppe. Your excellency does me too much honour. (Stretching his hand towards the flask) Perhaps some wine will answer your excellency’s purpose. Napoleon (hastily protecting the flask, and becoming quite serious). Wine! No: that would be waste. You are all the same: waste! waste! waste! (He marks the map with gravy, using his fork as a pen.) Clear away. (He finishes his wine; pushes back his chair; and uses his napkin, stretching his legs and leaning back, but still frown ing and thinking.) Giuseppe (clearing the table and removing the things to a tray on the sideboard). Every man to his trade, excellency. We innkeepers have plenty of cheap wine: we think nothing of spilling it. You great generals have plenty of cheap blood: you think nothing of spilling it. Is it not so, excellency? Napoleon. Blood costs nothing: wine costs money. (He rises and goes to the fireplace.) Giuseppe. They say you are careful of everything except human life, excellency. Napoleon. Human life, my friend, is the only thing that takes care of itself. (He throws himself at his ease on the couch.) Giuseppe (admiring him). Ah, excellency, what fools we all are beside you! If I could only find out the secret of your success! Napoleon. You would make yourself Emperor of Italy, eh? Giuseppe. Too troublesome, excellency: I leave all that to you. Besides, what would become of my inn if I were Emperor? See how you enjoy looking on at me whilst I keep the inn for you and wait on you! Well, I shall enjoy looking on at you whilst you become Emperor of Europe, and govern the country for me. (As he chatters, he takes the cloth off deftly without removing the map, and finally takes the cor ners in his hands and the middle in his mouth, to fold it up.) Napoleon. Emperor of Europe, eh? Why only Europe? Giuseppe. Why, indeed? Emperor of the world, excellency! Why not? (He folds and rolls up the cloth, emphasizing his phrase by the steps of the process.) One man is like another (fold): one country is like another (fold): one battle is like another. (At the last fold, he slaps the cloth on the table and deftly rolls it up, adding, by way of perora tion) Conquer one: conquer all. (He takes the cloth to the side board, and puts it in a drawer.) Napoleon. And govern for all; fight for all; be everybody’s servant under cover of being everybody’s master. Giuseppe. Giuseppe (at the sideboard). Excellency? Napoleon. I forbid you to talk to me about myself. Giuseppe (coming to the foot of the couch). Pardon. Your excellency is so unlike other great men. It is the subject they like best. Napoleon. Well, talk to me about the subject they like next best, whatever that may be. Giuseppe (unabashed). Willingly, your excellency. Has your excellency by any chance caught a glimpse of the lady upstairs? Napoleon (sitting up promptly). How old is she? Giuseppe. The right age, excellency. Napoleon. Do you mean seventeen or thirty? Giuseppe. Thirty, excellency. Napoleon. Good-looking? Giuseppe. I cannot see with your excellency’s eyes: every man must judge that for himself. In my opinion, excellency, a fine figure of a lady. (Slyly) Shall I lay the table for her collation here? Napoleon (brusquely, rising). No: lay nothing here until the officer for whom I am waiting comes back. (He looks at his watch, and takes to walking to and fro between the fireplace and the vineyard.) Giuseppe (with conviction). Excellency: believe me, he has been captured by the accursed Austrians. He dare not keep you waiting if he were at liberty. Napoleon (turning at the edge of the shadow of the veranda). Giuseppe: if that turns out to be true, it will put me into such a temper that nothing short of hanging you and your whole household, including the lady upstairs, will satisfy me. Giuseppe. We are all cheerfully at your excellency’s disposal, except the lady. I cannot answer for her; but no lady could resist you, General. Napoleon (sourly, resuming his march). Hm! You will never be hanged. There is no satisfaction in hanging a man who does not object to it. Giuseppe (sympathetically). Not the least in the world, excellency: is there? (napoleon again looks at his watch, evidently growing anx ious.) Ah, one can see that you are a great man, General: you know how to wait. If it were a corporal now, or a sub-lieutenant, at the end of three minutes he would be swearing, fuming, threatening, pulling the house about our ears. Napoleon. Giuseppe: your flatteries are insufferable. Go and talk outside. (He sits down again at the table, with his jaws in his hands, and his elbows propped on the map, poring over it with a troubled expression.) Giuseppe. Willingly, your excellency. You shall not be disturbed. (He takes up the tray and prepares to withdraw.) Napoleon. The moment he comes back, send him to me. Giuseppe. Instantaneously, your excellency. A Lady’s Voice (calling from some distant part of the inn). Giusep-pe! (The voice is very musical, and the two final notes make an ascend ing interval.) Napoleon (startled). Who’s that? Giuseppe. The lady, excellency. Napoleon. The lady upstairs? Giuseppe. Yes, excellency. The strange lady. Napoleon. Strange? Where does she come from? Giuseppe (with a shrug). Who knows? She arrived here just before your excellency in a hired carriage belonging to the Golden Eagle at Borghetto. By herself, excellency. No servants. A dressing-bag and a trunk: that is all. The postillion says she left a horse at the Golden Eagle. A charger, with military trappings. Napoleon. A woman with a charger! French or Austrian? Giuseppe. French, excellency. Napoleon. Her husband’s charger, no doubt. Killed at Lodi, poor fellow. The Lady’s Voice (the two final notes now making a peremptory de scending interval). Giuseppe! Napoleon (rising to listen). That’s not the voice of a woman whose husband was killed yesterday. Giuseppe. Husbands are not always regretted, excellency. (Calling) Coming, lady, coming. (He makes for the inner door.) Napoleon (arresting him with a strong hand on his shoulder). Stop. Let her come. Voice. Giuseppe!! (Impatiently.) Giuseppe. Let me go, excellency. It is my point of honour as an innkeeper to come when I am called. I appeal to you as a soldier. A Man’s Voice (outside, at the inn door, shouting). Here, someone. Hollo! Landlord! Where are you? (Somebody raps vigorously with a whip handle on a bench in the passage.) Napoleon (suddenly becoming the