continue..
the same well-known taste. His heart sank within him; his brain was in a whirl. “My God! my God!” he cried, “again, again! and it will never cease!” And suddenly the trouble presented itself to him absolutely in another guise. “The vermiform appendix! the kidney!” he said to himself. “The trouble lies, not in the blind intestine, not in the kidney…but in life…and death! Yes, once there was life; but now it is passing away, passing away, and I cannot hold it back. Yes. Why deceive oneself? Is it not evident to every one, except myself, that I am going to die? and it is only a question of weeks, of days…maybe instantly. It was light, but now darkness…. Now I was here, but then I shall be there! Where?” A chill ran over him, his breathing ceased. He heard only the thumping of his heart. “I shall not be, but what will be? There will be nothing. Then, where shall I be when I am no more? Will that be death? No, I will not have it!” He leaped up, wished to light the candle, fumbled about with trembling hands, knocked the candle and candlestick to the floor, and again fell back on the pillow. “Wherefore? It is all the same,” he said to himself, gazing into the darkness with wide-open eyes. “Death! Yes, death! And they know nothing about it, and wish to know nothing about it; and they do not pity me. They are playing.” He heard through the door the distant sound of voices and ritornelles. “To them it is all the same…and they also will die. Little fools! I first, and they after me. It will be their turn also. But they are enjoying themselves! Cattle!” Anger choked him, and he felt an insupportably heavy burden of anguish. “It cannot be that all men have been exposed to this horrible terror.” He lifted himself once more. “No, it is not so at all. I must calm myself; I must think it all over from the beginning.” And here he began to reflect: “Yes, the beginning of the trouble. I hit my side, and I was just the same as before, one day and the next, only a little ache, then more severe, then the doctor, then low spirits, anxiety, the doctor again. And I am all the time coming nearer and nearer to the abyss. Less strength. Nearer, nearer! And how wasted I am! I have no light in my eyes. And death…and I thinking about the intestine! I am thinking only how to cure my intestine; but this is death!—Is it really death?” Again fear fell on him. He panted, bent over, tried to find the matches, hit his elbow against the table. It hindered him, and hurt him; he lost his patience, pushed angrily against it with more violence, and tipped it over. And in despair, all out of breath, he fell back, expecting death instantly. At this time the visitors were going. Praskovia Feodorovna was showing them out. She heard the table fall, and came in. “What is the matter?” “Nothing…I unintentionally knocked it over,” She went out, and brought in a candle. He was lying, breathing heavily, and quickly, like a man who has just run a verst; his eyes were staring at her. “What is it, Jean?” “No-o-thing. I…knock-ed…over…. Why say anything? she will not understand,” he thought. She did not in the least understand. She picked up the table, lighted the candle for him, and hurried out. She had to say good night to her company. When she came back, he was still lying on his back, looking up. “What is the matter? Are you worse?” “Yes.” She shook her head, and sat down. “Do you know, Jean, I think we had better send for Leshchititsky? Don’t you?” That meant, send for the celebrated doctor, and not mind the expense. He smiled bitterly, and said: “No.” She sat a moment, then came to him, and kissed him on the forehead. He abhorred her, with all the strength of his soul, at that moment when she kissed him; and he had to restrain himself from pushing her away. “Good night! God give you pleasant sleep!” “Yes.” Ivan Ilyitch saw that he was going to die, and he was in perpetual despair. In the depths of his soul, he knew that he was going to die; but he not only failed to get used to the thought, but also simply did not comprehend it, could not comprehend it. This form of syllogism, which he had studied in Kiziveter’s “Logic”—“Kaï is a man, men are mortal, therefore Kaï is mortal”—had seemed to him all his life true only in its application to Kaï, but never to himself. It was Kaï as man, as man in general, and in this respect it was perfectly correct; but he was not Kaï, and not man in general, and he had always been an entity absolutely, absolutely distinct from all others; he had been Vanya with mamma and papa, with Mitya and Volodya, with his playthings, the coachman, with the nurse; then with Katenka, with all the joys, sorrows, enthusiasms of childhood, boyhood, youth. Was it Kaï who smelt the odor of the little striped leather ball that Vanya had loved so dearly? Was it Kaï who had kissed his mother’s hand? and was it for Kaï that the silken folds of his mother’s dress had rustled so pleasantly? Was it he who made a conspiracy for the tarts at the law school? Was it Kaï who had been so deeply in love? Was it Kaï who had such ability in conducting the sessions? “And Kaï is certainly mortal, and it is proper that he should die; but for me, Vanya, Ivan Ilyitch, with all my feelings, my thoughts—for me, that is another thing, and it cannot be that I must take my turn and die. That would be too horrible.” This was the way that he felt about it: “If I were going to die, like Kaï, then, surely, I should have known it; some internal voice would have told me; but nothing of the sort happened in me, and I myself, and my friends, all of us, have perceived that it was absolutely different in our case from what it was with Kaï. But now how is it?” he said to himself. “It cannot be, it cannot be, but it is! How is this? How understand it?” And he could not understand it; and he endeavored to put away this thought as false, unjust, unwholesome, and to supplant it with other thoughts true and wholesome. But this thought, not merely as a thought, but, as it were, a reality, kept recurring and taking form before him. And he summoned in place of this thought other thoughts, one after the other, in the hope of finding succor in them. He strove to return to his former course of reasoning, which hid from him of old the thought of death. But, strangely enough, all that which formerly hid, concealed, destroyed the image of death, was now incapable of producing that effect. Ivan Ilyitch came to spend the larger part of his time in these attempts to restore the former current of feeling which put death out of sight. Sometimes he said to himself: “I will take up my duties again; they certainly kept me alive.” And he went to court, driving away every sort of doubt. He joined his colleagues in conversation, and sat down, according to his old habit, pensively looking with dreamy eyes on the throng, and resting his two emaciated hands on the arms of his oak chair, leaning over, just as usual, toward his colleague, running through the brief, whispering his comments; and then, suddenly lifting his eyes, and sitting straight, he pronounced the well-known words, and began business. But suddenly, right in the midst of it, the pain in his side, entirely disregarding the time of public business, began its simultaneous business. Ivan Ilyitch perceived it, tried to turn his thoughts from it; but it took its course, and death came up and stood directly before him, and gazed at him: and he was stupefied; the fire died out in his eyes, and he began once more to ask himself: “Is there nothing true save it?” And his colleagues and subordinates saw with surprise and concern that he, this brilliant, keen judge, was confused, was making mistakes. He shook himself, tried to collect his thoughts, and in a way conducted the session till it adjourned, and then returned home with the melancholy consciousness that he no longer had the ability, as of old, to separate between his judicial acts and what he wished to put out of his thoughts; that even in the midst of his judicial acts, he could not deliver himself from it. And what was worse than all, was the fact that it distracted his attention, not to