continue..
couldn’t get it me by way of annuity? Sir Oliver (aside). An annuity! ha! ha! ha! a footman raise money by way of annuity! Well done, luxury, egad! Moses. But you must insure your place. Trip. Oh, with all my heart! I’ll insure my place, and my life too, if you please. Sir Oliver (aside). It’s more than I would your neck. Trip. But then, Moses, it must be done before this d—d register takes place—one wouldn’t like to have one’s name made public, you know. Moses. No, certainly. But is there nothing you could deposit? Trip. Why, nothing capital of my master’s wardrobe has dropped lately; but I could give you a mortgage on some of his winter clothes, with equity of redemption before November—or you shall have the reversion of the French velvet, or a post-obit on the blue and silver; these, I should think, Moses, with a few pair of point ruffles, as a collateral security—hey, my little fellow? Moses. Well, well. (Bell rings.) Trip. Gad, I heard the bell! I believe, gentlemen, I can now introduce you. Don’t forget the annuity, little Moses! This way, gentlemen, insure my place, you know. Sir Oliver (aside). If the man be a shadow of his master, this is the temple of dissipation indeed! (Exeunt.) Title: SCENE III—CHARLES SURFACE, CARELESS, ETC., ETC.,at a table with wine, etc. Charles Surface. ’Fore heaven, ’tis true!—there’s the great degeneracy of the age. Many of our acquaintance have taste, spirit, and politeness; but, plague on’t, they won’t drink. Careless. It is so, indeed, Charles! they give in to all the substantial luxuries of the table, and abstain from nothing but wine and wit. Charles Surface. Oh, certainly society suffers by it intolerably! for now, instead of the social spirit of raillery that used to mantle over a glass of bright Burgundy, their conversation is become just like the Spawater they drink, which has all the pertness and flatulence of champagne, without its spirit or flavour. First Gentleman. But what are they to do who love play better than wine? Careless. True! there’s Harry diets himself for gaming, and is now under a hazard regimen. Charles Surface. Then he’ll have the worst of it. What! you wouldn’t train a horse for the course by keeping him from corn! For my part, egad, I am now never so successful as when I am a little merry—let me throw on a bottle of champagne, and I never lose—at least I never feel my losses, which is exactly the same thing. Second Gentleman. Aye, that I believe. Charles Surface. And, then, what man can pretend to be a believer in love, who is an abjurer of wine? ’Tis the test by which the lover knows his own heart. Fill a dozen bumpers to a dozen beauties, and she that floats at top is the maid that has bewitched you. Careless. Now then, Charles, be honest, and give us your real favourite. Charles Surface. Why, I have withheld her only in compassion to you. If I toast her, you must give a round of her peers—which is impossible—on earth. Careless. Oh, then we’ll find some canonized vestals or heathen goddesses that will do, I warrant! Charles Surface. Here then, bumpers, you rogues! bumpers! Maria! Maria— (Drink.) First Gentleman. Maria who? Charles Surface. O, damn the surname!—’tis too formal to be registered in Love’s calendar—but now, Sir Toby Bumper, beware—we must have beauty superlative. Careless. Nay, never study, Sir Toby: we’ll stand to the toast, though your mistress should want an eye—and you know you have a song will excuse you. Sir Toby. Egad, so I have! and I’ll give him the song instead of the lady. (Sings.) Poem ```SONG AND CHORUS Here’s to the maiden of bashful fifteen; Here’s to the widow of fifty; Here’s to the flaunting extravagant quean, And here’s to the housewife that’s thrifty. Chorus. Let the toast pass— Drink to the lass— I’ll warrant she’ll prove an excuse for the glass. Here’s to the charmer whose dimples we prize; Now to the maid who has none, sir; Here’s to the girl with a pair of blue eyes, And here’s to the nymph with but one, sir. Chorus. Let the toast pass, etc. Here’s to the maid with a bosom of snow: Now to her that’s as brown as a berry: Here’s to the wife with a face full of woe, And now for the damsel that’s merry. Chorus. Let the toast pass, etc. For let ’em be clumsy, or let ’em be slim, Young or ancient, I care not a feather: So fill a pint bumper quite up to the brim, —And let us e’en toast ’em together. Chorus. Let the toast pass, etc. All. Bravo! Bravo!``` Enter trip, and whispers charles surface. Charles Surface. Gentlemen, you must excuse me a little.—Careless, take the chair, will you? Careless. Nay, prithee, Charles, what now? This is one of your peerless beauties, I suppose, has dropped in by chance? Charles Surface. No, faith! To tell you the truth, ’tis a Jew and a broker, who are come by appointment. Careless. Oh, damn it! let’s have the Jew in— First Gentleman. Aye, and the broker too, by all means. Second Gentleman. Yes, yes, the Jew and the broker. Charles Surface. Egad, with all my heart!—Trip, bid the gentlemen walk in. (Exit trip.) Though there’s one of them a stranger, I can tell you. Careless. Charles, let us give them some generous Burgundy, and perhaps they’ll grow conscientious. Charles Surface. Oh, hang ’em, no! wine does but draw forth a man’s natural qualities; and to make them drink would only be to whet their knavery. Enter trip, sir oliver surface, and moses. Charles Surface. So, honest Moses; walk in, pray, Mr. Premium—that’s the gentleman’s name, isn’t it, Moses? Moses. Yes, sir. Charles Surface. Set chairs, Trip.—Sit down, Mr. Premium.—Glasses, Trip.—Sit down, Moses.—Come, Mr. Premium, I’ll give you a sentiment; here’s “Success to usury!”—Moses, fill the gentleman a bumper. Moses. Success to usury! Careless. Right, Moses—usury is prudence and industry, and deserves to succeed. Sir Oliver. Then here’s—All the success it deserves! Careless. No, no, that won’t do! Mr. Premium, you have demurred to the toast, and must drink it in a pint bumper. First Gentleman. A pint bumper, at least. Moses. Oh, pray, sir, consider—Mr. Premium’s a gentleman. Careless. And therefore loves good wine. Second Gentleman. Give Moses a quart glass—this is mutiny, and a high contempt of the chair. Careless. Here, now for’t! I’ll see justice done, to the last drop of my bottle. Sir Oliver. Nay, pray, gentlemen—I did not expect this usage. Charles Surface. No, hang it, Careless, you shan’t; Mr. Premium’s a stranger. Sir Oliver (aside). Odd! I wish I was well out of this company. Careless. Plague on ’em then! if they won’t drink, well not sit down with ’em. Come, Harry, the dice are in the next room.—Charles, you’ll join us—when you have finished your business with these gentlemen? Charles Surface. I will! I will! (Exeunt Gentlemen.) Careless! Careless (returning). Well! Charles Surface. Perhaps I may want you. Careless. Oh, you know I am always ready—word, note, or bond, ’tis all the same to me. (Exit.) Moses. Sir, this is Mr. Premium, a gentleman of the strictest honour and secrecy; and always performs what he undertakes. Mr. Premium, this is— Charles Surface. Pshaw! have done! Sir, my friend Moses is a very honest fellow, but a little slow at expression; he’ll be an hour giving us our titles. Mr. Premium, the plain state of the matter is this—I am an extravagant young fellow who wants money to borrow; you I take to be a prudent old fellow, who has got money to lend. I am blockhead enough to give fifty per cent sooner than not have it; and you, I presume, are rogue enough to take a hundred if you could get it. Now, sir, you see we are acquainted at once, and may proceed to business without farther ceremony. Sir Oliver. Exceeding frank, upon my word. I see, sir, you are not a man of many compliments. Charles Surface. Oh, no, sir! plain dealing in business I always think best. Sir Oliver. Sir, I like you the better for’t. However, you are mistaken in one thing—I have no money to lend, but I believe I could procure some of a friend; but then he’s an unconscionable dog—isn’t he, Moses? And must sell stock to accommodate you—mustn’t he, Moses? Moses. Yes, indeed! You know I always speak the truth, and scorn to tell a lie! Charles Surface. Right! People that expect truth generally do. But these are trifles, Mr. Premium. What! I know money isn’t to be bought without paying for’t! Sir Oliver. Well, but what security could you give? You have no land, I suppose? Charles Surface. Not a mole-hill, not a twig, but what’s in beau-pots out at the window! Sir Oliver. Nor any stock, I presume? Charles Surface. Nothing but