continue..
efficient and sometimes not. In consequence only of the last-mentioned fact have we provisionally called the new reflexes “conditioned reflexes,” and for the sake of distinction we have called the old ones “unconditioned.” The further question naturally arose whether the conditions which determine the occurrence of the “conditioned reflexes” could be investigated, and whether a complete knowledge of the conditions would make it possible to impart to these reflexes a character of constancy. This question must be regarded, it seems to me, as answered in the affirmative. I will remind you of some well-established laws which have already been published from our laboratory. Every conditioned stimulus becomes totally ineffective on repetition. The shorter the interval between the separate repetitions of the conditioned reflex the more quickly is this reflex extinguished. The extinguishing of one conditioned reflex does not affect the operation of the others. Spontaneous restoration of extinguished conditioned reflexes does not occur until after the lapse of one, two, or more hours, but there is a way in which our reflex may be restored immediately. All that is necessary is to obtain a repetition of the unconditioned reflex, as, for instance, by pouring a weak solution of acid into the dog’s mouth and then either showing it to him or letting him smell it. The action of the last-mentioned stimulus, which was previously quite obliterated, is now restored in its full extent. The following fact can be regularly observed: If for a long time, such as days or weeks continuously, a certain kind of food is shown to the animal without it being given to him to eat, it loses its power of stimulating from a distance, that is, its power of acting from the eye, the nose, etc. These last-mentioned facts show plainly the close connection which exists between the stimulant effects of various properties of the substance—namely, the effects of the properties which excite secretion of saliva when the substance is in the mouth—and the effects of other properties of the same substance acting upon other receptive surfaces of the body. This material gives us the ground for assuming that the conditioned reflex in some way originates owing to the existence of the unconditioned reflex. And at the same time we may perceive the main features of the mechanism which gives rise to the conditioned reflex. When an object is placed in the mouth of the dog, some of its properties excite the simple reflex apparatus of the salivary glands; and for the production of our conditioned reflex that action must synchronize with the action of other properties of the same object influencing other receptive regions of the body whence the excitation is conveyed to other parts of the central nervous system. Just as the stimulant effects due to certain properties of an object placed in the mouth (unconditioned reflex) may coincide with a number of stimuli arising from other objects, so all these manifold stimuli may by frequent repetition be turned into conditioned stimuli for the salivary glands. Such stimuli may arise from the man who feeds the dog or who forcibly introduces certain articles into the dog’s mouth, or they may owe their origin to the general environment in which this takes place. For this reason the above-mentioned experiments, by which the laws of the conditioned reflexes must be determined, require for their performance a well-trained experimenter who can really investigate only the action of the given conditioned stimulus or a definite number of such stimuli, without unconsciously introducing new stimuli with each successive repetition. If this last condition is not realized the laws in question will naturally be obscured. It must be remembered that in feeding a dog or forcing something into his mouth, each separate movement and each variation of a movement may by itself represent a conditioned stimulus. If that is the case, and if our hypothesis as to the origin of the conditioned reflex is correct, it follows that any natural phenomenon chosen at will may be converted into a conditioned stimulus. This has, in effect, been proved to be true. Any visual stimulus, any desired sound, any odor, and the stimulation of any part of the skin, either by mechanical means or by the application of heat or cold, have never failed in our hands to stimulate the salivary glands, although before they were all ineffective for that purpose. This was accomplished by applying the stimuli simultaneously with the action of the salivary glands, their action having been evoked by the giving of certain kinds of food, or by forcing certain substances into the dog’s mouth. These artificial conditioned reflexes, the product of our training, showed exactly the same properties as the previously described natural conditioned reflexes. As regards their extinction and restoration they followed essentially the same laws as the natural conditioned reflexes. Thus we have the right to say that our analysis of the origin of conditioned reflexes is proved by the facts. Now that so much has been adduced on the subject we may advance further than was possible at the outset in the understanding of conditioned reflexes. In the manifestations of nervous energy which have up to the present time been submitted to careful scientific examination (our old specific reflex), the stimuli with which we had to do were comparatively few in number, but very constant in their action, and there was abundant evidence of a constant connection existing between the external influences and definite physiological effects. Now, however, in another more complicated part of the nervous system we encounter a new phenomenon, namely, the conditioned stimulus. On the one hand, this nervous apparatus becomes responsible in the highest degree, i.e., it is susceptible to the most varied external stimuli, but, on the other hand, these stimuli are not constant in their operation and are not definitely associated with certain physiological effects. At any given moment we find comparatively few circumstances favorable for these stimuli becoming active in the organism for a longer or shorter time and producing distinct physiological results. The introduction of the idea of conditioned stimuli into physiology seems to me to be justified for many reasons. In the first place, it corresponds to the facts that have been adduced, since it represents a direct inference from them. In the second place, it is in agreement with the general mechanical hypotheses of natural science. In many kinds of apparatus and machinery, even of simple construction, certain forces can not develop their action unless at the proper time the necessary conditions are present. In the third place, it is completely covered by the ideas of facilitation (bahnung) and inhibition, ideas which have been sufficiently elaborated in recent physiological literature. Finally, in these conditioned stimuli, looked at from the point of view of general biology, we have a most perfect mechanism of adaptation, or, what amounts to the same thing, a very delicate mechanism for maintaining an equilibrium with the surrounding medium. The body has the capacity to react in a sensitive way to the phenomena of the outer world which are essential to it, because all other phenomena of the outer world, even the most insignificant, coinciding even temporarily with the essential become their indicators or, as they may be called, their signalling stimuli. The delicacy of the reaction shows itself both in the production of the conditioned stimulus and in its disappearance when it ceases to be a proper signal. There must be assumed to exist at this point one of the chief mechanisms for further discrimination in the nervous system. In view of all this, it is permissible, I think, to regard the idea of conditioned stimuli as the fruit of previous labors of biologists, and to consider my present report as illustrating the result of this work on a most complicated subject. It would be unreasonable to attempt to determine at present the limits of the immense field thus opened and to partition it. The following must be regarded as, and nothing more than, a provisional arrangement of material that has been collected, giving only the points indispensable for purposes of explanation. There are reasons for considering the process of the conditioned reflex to be elementary, namely, a process which consists only in the coincidence of any one of the innumerable indifferent external stimuli with a state of excitation of a point in a definite part of the central nervous system. Now a path is established between the former indifferent stimulus and this given point. The first argument in favor of this hypothesis is the repeated occurrence of this phenomenon: the conditioned reflex may be obtained in all dogs, and it may be produced by all imaginable stimuli. In the second place, there is the certainty of its occurrence; under definite conditions it is reproduced inevitably. We see, therefore, that the process is not complicated by any other (and unknown) conditions. It may here be mentioned that various conditioned stimuli which had been rendered effective were applied at a distance, as