continue..
death,” laughed Morissot. They both gave a frightened start. They had a feeling that somebody was moving behind them. Turning their heads they saw, standing at their backs, four great hulking brutes, armed and bearded, dressed like liveried footmen, with flat caps on their heads, and rifles leveled. The rods dropped from their hands and went floating down the river. In a matter of seconds they were seized, carried off, flung into a boat, and ferried across to the island. Behind the building they had thought deserted, they saw about twenty German soldiers. A sort of hairy giant astride upon a chair and smoking a long porcelain pipe, asked them in excellent French: “Did you have good fishing, gentlemen?” One of the soldiers laid the net filled with fish at the officer’s feet. The Prussian smiled: “Not too bad, I see. But we have other things to think about. Just listen to me and don’t worry. “So far as I am concerned you are two spies sent to keep a watch on me. I have taken you and I shall shoot you. You have been pretending to fish, the better to conceal your real intentions. You have fallen into my hands. So much the worse for you: but war is war. “Since, however, you came through your own lines, I take it that you have been given the countersign which will enable you to return the same way. Give that countersign to me and I will spare your lives.” The two friends stood side-by-side with ashen faces. Their hands were twitching nervously, but they said nothing. The officer went on: “No one will be the wiser. You will return undisturbed. The secret will go with you. If you refuse, you die—instantly. Which will you choose?” They still stood motionless. Not a word came from them. Quite calmly, the Prussian pointed to the river, and continued: “In five minutes you will be at the bottom of that. Five minutes. I suppose you have relatives?” Mont Valérien was still thundering. The two fishermen stood perfectly still and silent. The German gave an order in his own language. Then he moved his chair so as not to be too close to the prisoners, and twelve men marched up and halted at a distance of twenty paces, their rifles at the order. “I give you one minute now, not a second more.” Then he got quickly to his feet, approached the two Frenchmen, took Morissot by the arm, and led him to one side. In a low voice, he said: “Give me the countersign. Your friend need know nothing. I will make it look as though I have relented.” Morissot said nothing. The Prussian repeated the maneuver with Monsieur Sauvage, and made the same suggestion to him. Monsieur Sauvage said nothing. They were back as they had been, side-by-side. The officer gave an order. The soldiers raised their rifles. Morissot’s eyes happened to fall on the netful of gudgeon lying in the grass quite close to him. A ray of sunshine fell on the pile of still-squirming fish, and made them glitter. He was guilty of a moment’s weakness. In spite of his effort to hold them back, two tears came into his eyes. “Good-by, Monsieur Sauvage,” he said unsteadily. “Good-by, Monsieur Morissot,” Monsieur Sauvage said. They shook hands, trembling uncontrollably from head to foot. “Fire!” shouted the officer. The twelve shots rang out like one. Monsieur Sauvage fell forward like a log. Morissot, who was taller, swayed, spun round, and collapsed across his friend. He lay with his face to the sky, a few drops of blood bubbling from holes in the front of his coat. The German issued some further orders. His men scattered and came back with some lengths of rope and a few stones which they fastened to the feet of the dead men. Then they carried them to the bank. Mont Valérien was still thundering. By this time there was a great mountain of smoke above it. Two soldiers lifted Morissot by the head and feet. Two others did the same with Monsieur Sauvage. The bodies were swung violently backwards and forwards for a few moments, then pitched into the river, where they fell feet foremost, the stones weighting them down. The water splashed, seethed, quivered, then grew calm again. A few small ripples broke against the bank. A little blood floated on the surface. The officer, still entirely unperturbed, said, in a low voice: “It is the fishes’ turn now.” He noticed the net of gudgeon on the grass. He picked it up, looked it over, smiled and called: “Wilhelm!” A soldier in a white apron hurried up. The officer threw him the haul of the two shot fishermen, and said: “Fry these little creatures, quickly, while they are still alive. They will be delicious.” Then, he returned to his pipe.