continue..
of its parts! The class composed of the even integers is thinned out as compared with the class of all integers, but evidently “thinning out” has not the slightest effect on its cardinality. Moreover, there is almost no limit to the number of times this process can be repeated. For instance, there are as many square numbers and cube numbers as there are integers. The appropriate pairings are: Indeed, from any denumerable class there can always be removed a denumerably infinite number of denumerably infinite classes without affecting the cardinality of the original class. Infinite classes which can be put into one-to-one correspondence with the integers, and thus “counted,” Cantor called countable, or denumerably infinite. Since all finite sets are countable, and we can assign to each one a number, it is natural to try to extend this notion and assign to the class of all integers a number representing its cardinality. Yet, it is obvious from our description of “infinite class” that no ordinary integer would be adequate to describe the cardinality of the whole class of integers. In effect, it would be asking a snake to swallow itself entirely. Thus, the first of the transfinite numbers was created to describe the cardinality of countable infinite classes. Etymologically old, mathematically new, ℵ (aleph), the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet, was suggested. However, Cantor finally decided to use the compound symbol ℵ (Aleph-Null). If asked, “How many integers are there?” it would be correct to reply, “There are ℵ integers.” Because he suspected that there were other transfinite numbers, in fact an infinite number of transfinites, and the cardinality of the integers the smallest, Cantor affixed to the first ℵ a small zero as subscript. The cardinality of a denumerably infinite class is therefore referred to as ℵ (Aleph-Null). The anticipated transfinite numbers form a hierarchy of alephs: ℵ, ℵ, ℵ, ℵ… All this may seem very strange, and it is quite excusable for the reader by now to be thoroughly bewildered. Yet, if you have followed the previous reasoning step by step, and will go to the trouble of rereading, you will see that nothing which has been said is repugnant to straight thinking. Having established what is meant by counting in the finite domain, and what is meant by number, we decided to extend the counting process to infinite classes. As for our right to follow such a procedure, we have the same right, for example, as those who decided that man had crawled on the surface of the earth long enough and that it was about time for him to fly. It is our right to venture forth in the world of ideas as it is our right to extend our horizons in the physical universe. One restraint alone is laid upon us in these adventures of ideas: that we abide by the rules of logic. Upon extending the counting process it was evident at once that no finite number could adequately describe an infinite class. If any number of ordinary arithmetic describes the cardinality of a class, that class must be finite, even though there were not enough ink or enough space or enough time to write the number out. We shall then require an entirely new kind of number, nowhere to be found in finite arithmetic, to describe the cardinality of an infinite class. Accordingly, the totality of integers was assigned the cardinality “aleph.” Suspecting that there were other infinite classes with a cardinality greater than that of the totality of integers, we supposed a whole hierarchy of alephs, of which the cardinal number of the totality of integers was named Aleph-Null to indicate it was the smallest of the transfinites. Having had an interlude in the form of a summary, let us turn once more to scrutinize the alephs, to find if, upon closer acquaintance, they may not become easier to understand. The arithmetic of the alephs bears little resemblance to that of the finite integers. The immodest behavior of ℵ is typical. A simple problem in addition looks like this: The multiplication table would be easy to teach, easier to learn: where n represents any finite number. Also, And thus, when n is a finite integer. There seems to be no variation of the theme; the monotony appears inescapable. But it is all very deceptive and treacherous. We go along obtaining the same result, no matter what we do to ℵ, when suddenly we try: This operation, at last, creates a new transfinite. But before considering it, there is more to be said about countable classes. Common sense says that there are many more fractions than integers, for between any two integers there is an infinite number of fractions. Alas—common sense is amidst alien corn in the land of the infinite. Cantor discovered a simple but elegant proof that the rational fractions form a denumerably infinite sequence equivalent to the class of integers. Whence, this sequence must have the same cardinality. The set of all rational fractions is arranged, not in order of increasing magnitude, but in order of ascending numerators and denominators in an array: Since each fraction may be written as a pair of integers, i.e., 3/4 as (3,4), the familiar one-to-one correspondence with the integers may be effected. This is illustrated in the above array by the arrows. Cantor also found, by means of a proof (too technical to concern us here) based on the “height” of algebraic equations, that the class of all algebraic numbers, numbers which are the solutions of algebraic equations with integer coefficients, of the form: is denumerably infinite. But Cantor felt that there were other transfinites, that there were classes which were not countable, which could not be put into one-to-one correspondence with the integers. And one of his greatest triumphs came when he succeeded in showing that there are classes with a cardinality greater than ℵ. The class of real numbers composed of the rational and irrational numbers is such a class. It contains those irrationals which are algebraic as well as those which are not. The latter are called transcendental numbers. Two important transcendental numbers were known to exist in Cantor’s time: π, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter, and e, the base of the natural logarithms. Little more was known about the class of transcendentals: it was an enigma. What Cantor had to prove, in order to show that the class of real numbers was nondenumerable (i.e., too big to be counted by the class of integers), was the unlikely fact that the class of transcendentals was nondenumerable. Since the rational and the algebraic numbers were known to be denumerable, and the sum of any denumerable number of denumerable classes is also a denumerable class, the sole remaining class which could make the totality of real numbers nondenumerable was the class of transcendentals. He was able to devise such a proof. If it can be shown that the class of real numbers between 0 and 1 is nondenumerable, it will follow a fortiori that all the real numbers are nondenumerable. Employing a device often used in advanced mathematics, the reductio ad absurdum, Cantor assumed that to be true which he suspected was false, and then showed that this assumption led to a contradiction. He assumed that the real numbers between 0 and 1 were countable and could, therefore, be paired with the integers. Having proved that this assumption led to a contradiction, it followed that its opposite, namely, that the real numbers could not be paired with the integers (and were therefore not countable), was true. To count the real numbers betwen 0 and 1, it is required that they all be expressed in a uniform way and a method of writing them down in order be devised so that they can be paired one to one with the integers. The first requirement can be fulfilled, for it is possible to express every real number as a nonterminating decimal. Thus, for example: Now, the second requirement confronts us. How shall we make the pairings? What system may be devised to ensure the appearance of every decimal? We did find a method for ensuring the appearance of every rational fraction. Of course, we could not actually write them all, any more than we could actually write all the integers; but the method of increasing numerators and denominators was so explicit that, if we had had an infinite time in which to do it, we could actually have set down all the fractions and have been certain that we had not omitted any. Or, to put it another way: It was always certain and determinate after a fraction had been paired with an integer, what the next fraction would be, and the next, and the next, and so on. On the other hand, when a real number, expressed as a nonterminating decimal, is paired with an integer, what method is there for determining what the next decimal in