continue..
painful pity for himself, and of painful wrath against this physician who showed such indifference to such a vital question. But he said nothing; then he got up, laid some money on the table, and, with a sigh, said: “Probably we sick men often ask you foolish questions,” said he; “but, in general, is this trouble serious, or not?” The doctor gave him a severe glance with one eye, through the spectacles, as if to say: “Prisoner at the bar, if you do not confine yourself to the limits of the questions already put to you, I shall be constrained to take measures for having you put out of the audience chamber.” “I have already told you what I considered necessary and suitable,” said the doctor; “a further examination will complete the diagnosis”; and the doctor bowed him out. Ivan Ilyitch went out slowly, lugubriously took his seat in his sledge, and drove home. All the way he kept repeating what the doctor had said, endeavoring to translate all those involved scientific phrases into simple language, and find in them an answer to the question, “Is it a serious, very serious, case for me, or is it a mere nothing?” And it seemed to him that the sense of all the doctor’s words indicated a very serious case. The aspect of everything in the streets was gloomy. The izvozchiks were gloomy; gloomy the houses, the pedestrians; the shops were gloomy. This pain, this obscure, dull pain, which did not leave him for a second, seemed to him, when taken in connection with the doctor’s ambiguous remarks, to gather a new and more serious significance. Ivan Ilyitch, with a new sense of depression, now took heed of it. He reached home, and began to tell his wife. His wife listened, but while he was in the midst of his account, his daughter came in with her hat on; she was ready to go out with her mother. She sat down with evident disrelish to listen to this wearisome tale, but she was not detained long; her mother did not hear him out. “Well,” said she, “I am very glad, for now you will be careful, and take your medicine properly. Give me the prescription, and I will send Gerasim to the apothecary’s.” And she went to get dressed. He could not get a long breath all the time that she was in the room, and he sighed heavily when she went out. “Well,” said he, “perhaps it’s a mere nothing, after all.” He began to take his medicine, and to follow the doctor’s prescriptions, which were somewhat modified after the urine had been analyzed. But just here it so happened exactly that in this analysis, and in what ought to have followed it, there was some confusion. It was impossible to trace it back to the doctor, but the result was that what the doctor said to him did not take place. Either he had forgotten or neglected or concealed something from him. But Ivan Ilyitch nevertheless began faithfully to follow the doctor’s prescriptions, and in this way at first he found consolation. Ivan Ilyitch’s principal occupation, after he went to consult the doctor, consisted in carefully carrying out the doctor’s prescription in regard to hygiene, and taking his medicine, and watching the symptoms of his malady, all the functions of his organism. Ivan Ilyitch became chiefly interested in human disease and human health. When people spoke in his presence of those who were sick, of those who had died, of those who were recuperating, especially from diseases like his own, he would listen. endeavoring to hide his agitation, would ask questions, and make comparisons with his own ailment. The pain did not diminish, but Ivan Ilyitch compelled himself to feign that he was getting better. And he was able to deceive himself as long as there was nothing to irritate him. But the moment that he had any disagreeable scene with his wife, any failure at court, a bad hand at vint, then he instantly felt the full force of his malady; formerly he endured these reverses, hopefully saying to himself: “Now I shall straighten out this wretched business, shall conquer, shall attain success, win the next hand.” But now every little failure cut him down, and plunged him in despair. He said to himself: “Here I was just beginning to get a little better, and the medicine was already helping me, and here this cursed bad luck or this unpleasantness….” And he would break out against his bad luck, or against the people that brought him unpleasantness, and were killing him; and he realized how this fit of anger was killing him, but he could not control it. It would seem that it must be clear to him that these fits of anger against circumstances and people made his malady worse, and that, therefore, he ought not to notice disagreeable trifles; but he reasoned in precisely the opposite way: he said that he needed quiet; he was on the watch for everything which disturbed this quiet, and at every least disturbance his irritation broke out. His condition was rendered worse by the fact that he read medical works, and consulted doctors. The progress of his disease was so gradual that he was able to deceive himself by comparing one evening with the next; there was little difference. But when he consulted the doctors, then it seemed to him that it was growing worse, and very rapidly also. And notwithstanding that he constantly consulted doctors. During this month he went to another celebrity; the second celebrity said pretty much the same as the first had said, but he asked questions in a different way. And the consultation with this celebrity redoubled Ivan Ilyitch’s doubt and fear. A friend of a friend of his—a very good doctor—gave an absolutely different definition of his malady; and, notwithstanding the fact that he predicted recovery, his questions and hypotheses still further confused Ivan Ilyitch, and increased his doubts. A homeopathist defined his disease in a still different manner, and gave him some pellets; and Ivan Ilyitch, without being suspected by any one, took them for a week. But at the end of the week, not perceiving that any relief came of them, and losing faith, not only in this, but in his former methods of treatment, he fell into still greater melancholy. One time a lady of his acquaintance was telling him about cures effected by means of icons. Ivan Ilyitch surprised himself by listening attentively, and believing in the reality of the fact. This circumstance frightened him. “Is it possible that I have reached such a degree of mental weakness?” he asked himself. “Nonsense! All rubbish! One must not give way to mere fancies. Now I’m going to select one physician, and rigorously follow his advice. That’s what I will do. That’s the end of it. I will not bother my brain, and till summer I will strictly carry out his prescription; and then the result will be seen. Now for an end to these hesitations.” It was easy to say this, but impossible to carry it out. The pain in his side kept troubling him, kept growing if anything worse, became incessant; the taste in his mouth became always more and more peculiar; it seemed to him that his breath was disagreeable, and that he was all the time losing his appetite and strength. It was impossible to deceive himself; something terrible, novel, and significant, more significant than anything which had ever happened before to Ivan Ilyitch, was taking place in him. And he alone was conscious of it; those who surrounded him did not comprehend it, or did not wish to comprehend it, and thought that everything in the world was going on as before. This more than aught else pained Ivan Ilyitch. His family—especially his wife and daughter, who were in the very white heat of social pleasures—he saw, did not comprehend at all, were vexed with him because he was gloomy and exacting, as if he were to blame for it. Even though they tried to hide it, he saw that he was in their way, but that his wife had definitely made up her mind in regard to his trouble, and stuck to it, no matter what he might say or do. This mental attitude was expressed in some such way as this: “You know,” she would say to an acquaintance, “Ivan Ilyitch, like all easygoing men, can’t carry out the doctor’s prescriptions strictly. One day he will take his drops, and eat what is ordered for him, and go to bed in good season; then all of a sudden, if I don’t look out, he will forget to take his medicine, will eat sturgeon—though it is forbidden—yes, and sit up at vint till one o’clock.” “Well, now, when?” asks Ivan Ilyitch, with asperity. “Just once at Piotr Ivanovitch’s.” “And last evening with Shebek.” “All right—I could not