continue..
the little matter we speak of they’re charming people,” said Pemberton, not taking up the point made for his intelligence, but wondering greatly at the boy’s own, and especially at this fresh reminder of something he had been conscious of from the first—the strangest thing in his friend’s large little composition, a temper, a sensibility, even a private ideal, which made him as privately disown the stuff his people were made of. Morgan had in secret a small loftiness which made him acute about betrayed meanness; as well as a critical sense for the manners immediately surrounding him that was quite without precedent in a juvenile nature, especially when one noted that it had not made this nature “old-fashioned,” as the word is of children—quaint or wizened or offensive. It was as if he had been a little gentleman and had paid the penalty by discovering that he was the only such person in his family. This comparison didn’t make him vain, but it could make him melancholy and a trifle austere. While Pemberton guessed at these dim young things, shadows of shadows, he was partly drawn on and partly checked, as for a scruple, by the charm of attempting to sound the little cool shallows that were so quickly growing deeper. When he tried to figure to himself the morning twilight of childhood, so as to deal with it safely, he saw it was never fixed, never arrested, that ignorance, at the instant he touched it, was already flushing faintly into knowledge, that there was nothing that at a given moment you could say an intelligent child didn’t know. It seemed to him that he himself knew too much to imagine Morgan’s simplicity and too little to disembroil his tangle. The boy paid no heed to his last remark; he only went on: “I’d have spoken to them about their idea, as I call it, long ago, if I hadn’t been sure what they’d say.” “And what would they say?” “Just what they said about what poor Zénobie told me—that it was a horrid dreadful story, that they had paid her every penny they owed her.” “Well, perhaps they had,” said Pemberton. “Perhaps they’ve paid you!” “Let us pretend they have, and n’en parlons plus [speak no more about it].” “They accused her of lying and cheating”—Morgan stuck to historic truth. “That’s why I don’t want to speak to them.” “Lest they should accuse me too?” To this Morgan made no answer, and his companion, looking down at him—the boy turned away his eyes, which had filled—saw that he couldn’t have trusted himself to utter. “You’re right. Don’t worry them,” Pemberton pursued. “Except for that, they are charming people.” “Except for their lying and their cheating?” “I say—I say!” cried Pemberton, imitating a little tone of the lad’s which was itself an imitation. “We must be frank, at the last; we must come to an understanding,” said Morgan with the importance of the small boy who lets himself think he is arranging great affairs—almost playing at shipwreck or at Indians. “I know all about everything.” “I dare say your father has his reasons,” Pemberton replied, but too vaguely, as he was aware. “For lying and cheating?” “For saving and managing and turning his means to the best account. He has plenty to do with his money. You’re an expensive family.” “Yes, I’m very expensive,” Morgan concurred in a manner that made his preceptor burst out laughing. “He’s saving for you,” said Pemberton. “They think of you in everything they do.” “He might, while he’s about it, save a little—” The boy paused, and his friend waited to hear what. Then Morgan brought out oddly: “A little reputation.” “Oh there’s plenty of that. That’s all right!” “Enough of it for the people they know, no doubt. The people they know are awful.” “Do you mean the princes? We mustn’t abuse the princes.” “Why not? They haven’t married Paula—they haven’t married Amy. They only clean out Ulick.” “You do know everything!” Pemberton declared. “No, I don’t after all. I don’t know what they live on, or how they live, or why they live! What have they got and how did they get it? Are they rich, are they poor, or have they a modeste aisance [moderate wherewithal]? Why are they always chiveying me about—living one year like ambassadors and the next like paupers? Who are they, anyway, and what are they? I’ve thought of all that—I’ve thought of a lot of things. They’re so beastly worldly. That’s what I hate most—oh, I’ve seen it! All they care about is to make an appearance and to pass for something or other. What the dickens do they want to pass for? What do they, Mr. Pemberton?” “You pause for a reply,” said Pemberton, treating the question as a joke, yet wondering too and greatly struck with his mate’s intense if imperfect vision. “I haven’t the least idea.” “And what good does it do? Haven’t I seen the way people treat them—the ‘nice’ people, the ones they want to know? They’ll take anything from them—they’ll lie down and be trampled on. The nice ones hate that—they just sicken them. You’re the only really nice person we know.” “Are you sure? They don’t lie down for me!” “Well, you shan’t lie down for them. You’ve got to go—that’s what you’ve got to do,” said Morgan. “And what will become of you?” “Oh I’m growing up. I shall get off before long. I’ll see you later.” “You had better let me finish you,” Pemberton urged, lending himself to the child’s strange superiority. Morgan stopped in their walk, looking up at him. He had to look up much less than a couple of years before—he had grown, in his loose leanness, so long and high. “Finish me?” he echoed. “There are such a lot of jolly things we can do together yet I want to turn you out—I want you to do me credit.” Morgan continued to look at him. “To give you credit—do you mean?” “My dear fellow, you’re too clever to live.” “That’s just what I’m afraid you think. No, no; it isn’t fair—I can’t endure it. We’ll separate next week. The sooner it’s over the sooner to sleep.” “If I hear of anything—any other chance—I promise to go,” Pemberton said. Morgan consented to consider this. “But you’ll be honest,” he demanded; “you won’t pretend you haven’t heard?” “I’m much more likely to pretend I have.” “But what can you hear of, this way, stuck in a hole with us? You ought to be on the spot, to go to England—you ought to go to America.” “One would think you were my tutor!” said Pemberton. Morgan walked on and after a little had begun again: “Well, now that you know I know and that we look at the facts and keep nothing back— it’s much more comfortable, isn’t it?” “My dear boy, it’s so amusing, so interesting, that it will surely be quite impossible for me to forego such hours as these.” This made Morgan stop once more. “You do keep something back. Oh you’re not straight—I am!” “How am I not straight?” “Oh you’ve got your idea!” “My idea?” “Why that I probably shan’t make old—make older—bones, and that you can stick it out till I’m removed.” “You are too clever to live!” Pemberton repeated. “I call it a mean idea,” Morgan pursued. “But I shall punish you by the way I hang on.” “Look out or I’ll poison you!” Pemberton laughed. “I’m stronger and better every year. Haven’t you noticed that there hasn’t been a doctor near me since you came?” “I’m your doctor,” said the young man, taking his arm and drawing him tenderly on again. Morgan proceeded and after a few steps gave a sigh of mingled weariness and relief. “Ah, now that we look at the facts it’s all right!” They looked at the facts a good deal after this; and one of the first consequences of their doing so was that Pemberton stuck it out, in his friend’s parlance, for the purpose. Morgan made the facts so vivid and so droll, and at the same time so bald and so ugly, that there was fascination in talking them over with him, just as there would have been heartlessness in leaving him alone with them. Now that the pair had such perceptions in common it was useless for them to pretend they didn’t judge such people; but the very judgment and the exchange of perceptions created another tie. Morgan had never been so interesting as now that he himself was made plainer by the sidelight of these confidences. What came out in it most was the small fine passion of his pride. He had plenty of that, Pemberton felt—so much that one might perhaps wisely wish for it some early bruises. He would have liked his people to have a spirit and had waked up to the sense of their