Work: The Queen of Spades Field: queen of spades Author: Alexander Pushkin Title: IV Poem ```A Correspondence 7 mai, 18 – – Homme sans moeurs et sans religion! [A man without morals or religion!]``` Lizaveta Ivanovna was sitting in her room, still in her ball dress, lost in deep thought. On returning home, she had hastily dismissed the sleepy maid, who reluctantly came forward to assist her, saying that she would undress herself, and with a trembling heart had gone up to her own room, hoping to find Hermann there, but yet desiring not to find him. At the first glance she convinced herself that he was not there, and she thanked her fate for the obstacle which had prevented their meeting. She sat down without undressing, and began to recall to mind all the circumstances which in so short a time had carried her so far. It was not three weeks since the time when she had first seen the young man from the window—and she already was in correspondence with him, and he had succeeded in inducing her to grant him a nocturnal tryst! She knew his name only through his having written it at the bottom of some of his letters; she had never spoken to him, had never heard his voice, and had never heard anything of him until that evening. But, strange to say, that very evening at the ball, Tomsky, being piqued with the young Princess Pauline N., who, contrary to her usual custom, did not flirt with him, wished to revenge himself by assuming an air of indifference: he therefore engaged Lizaveta Ivanovna and danced an endless mazurka with her. All the time he kept teasing her about her partiality for officers in the Engineers; he assured her that he knew far more than she could have supposed, and some of his jests were so happily aimed, that Lizaveta thought several times that her secret was known to him. “From whom have you learned all this?” she asked, smiling. “From a friend of a person very well known to you,” replied Tomsky, “from a very remarkable man.” “And who is this remarkable man?” “His name is Hermann.” Lizaveta made no reply; but her hands and feet turned to ice. “This Hermann,” continued Tomsky, “is a truly romantic character. He has the profile of a Napoleon, and the soul of a Mephistopheles. I believe that he has at least three crimes upon his conscience…. How pale you are!” “I have a headache…. But what did this Hermann—or whatever his name is—tell you?” “Hermann is very much dissatisfied with his friend: he says that in his place he would act very differently…. I even think that Hermann himself has designs upon you; at least, he listens not indifferently to his friend’s enamoured exclamations.” “But where has he seen me?” “In church, perhaps; or promenading—God alone knows where. It may have been in your room, while you were asleep, for he is capable of it.” Three ladies approaching him with the question: “Oubli ou regret [Forgetfulness or regret]?” interrupted the conversation, which had become so tantalizingly interesting to Lizaveta. The lady chosen by Tomsky was the Princess Pauline herself. She succeeded in effecting a reconciliation with him by making an extra turn in the dance and managing to delay resuming her seat. On returning to his place, Tomsky thought no more either of Hermann or Lizaveta. She longed to renew the interrupted conversation, but the mazurka came to an end, and shortly afterwards the old Countess took her departure. Tomsky’s words were nothing more than the small talk of the mazurka, but they sank deep into the soul of the young dreamer. The portrait, sketched by Tomsky, agreed with the picture she had formed in her own mind, and that image, rendered commonplace by current novels, terrified and fascinated her imagination. She was now sitting with her bare arms crossed and her head, still adorned with flowers, was bowed over her half-uncovered breast. Suddenly the door opened and Hermann entered. She shuddered. “Where have you been?” she asked in a frightened whisper. “In the old Countess’ bedroom,” replied Hermann. “I have just left her. The Countess is dead.” “My God! What are you saying?” “And I am afraid,” added Hermann, “that I am the cause of her death.” Lizaveta looked at him, and Tomsky’s words found an echo in her soul: “This man has at least three crimes upon his conscience!” Hermann sat down by the window near her, and related all that had happened. Lizaveta listened to him in terror. So all those passionate letters, those ardent demands, this bold obstinate pursuit—all this was not love! Money—that was what his soul yearned for! She could not satisfy his desire and make him happy! The poor girl had been nothing but the blind accomplice of a robber, of the murderer of her aged benefactress!… She wept bitter tears of belated, agonized repentance. Hermann gazed at her in silence: his heart, too, was tormented, but neither the tears of the poor girl, nor the wonderful charm of her beauty, enhanced by her grief, could produce any impression upon his hardened soul. He felt no pricking of conscience at the thought of the dead old woman. One thing only horrified him: the irreparable loss of the secret which he had expected would bring him wealth. “You are a monster!” said Lizaveta at last. “I did not wish her death,” replied Hermann: “my pistol is not loaded.” Both grew silent. The day began to dawn. Lizaveta extinguished her candle: a pale light illumined her room. She wiped her tear-stained eyes and raised them toward Hermann: he was sitting on the window-sill, with his arms folded and frowning fiercely. In this attitude he bore a striking resemblance to the portrait of Napoleon. This resemblance struck even Lizaveta Ivanovna. “How shall I get you out of the house?” said she at last. “I thought of conducting you down the secret staircase, but in that case it would be necessary to go through the Countess’ bedroom, and I am afraid.” “Tell me how to find this secret staircase—I will go alone.” Lizaveta arose, took from her drawer a key, handed it to Hermann and gave him the necessary instructions. Hermann pressed her cold, unresponsive hand, kissed her bowed head, and left the room. He descended the winding staircase, and once more entered the Countess’ bedroom. The dead old woman sat as if petrified; her face expressed profound tranquillity. Hermann stopped before her, and gazed long and earnestly at her, as if he wished to convince himself of the terrible reality; at last he entered the study, felt behind the tapestry for the door, and then began to descend the dark staircase, agitated by strange emotions. “At this very hour,” thought he, “some sixty years ago, a young gallant, who has long been mouldering in his grave, may have stolen down this very staircase, perhaps coming from the very same bedroom, wearing an embroidered caftan, with his hair dressed à l’oiseau royal and pressing to his heart his three-cornered hat, and the heart of his aged mistress has only today ceased to beat….” At the bottom of the staircase Hermann found a door, which he opened with the same key, and found himself in a corridor which led him into the street.