continue..
for he is likely to win the race. Even though we may not have realized it, we have just finished proving that he could overtake the tortoise by showing that a line a millionth of an inch long has just as many points as a line stretching from the earth to the farthest star. In other words, the points on the tiny line segment can be placed into one-to-one correspondence with the points on the great line, for there is no relation between the number of points on a line and its length. But this reveals the error in thinking that Achilles cannot catch the tortoise. The statement that Achilles must occupy as many distinct positions as the tortoise is correct. So is the statement that he must travel a greater distance than the tortoise in the same time. The only incorrect statement is the inference that since he must occupy the same number of positions as the tortoise he cannot travel further while doing so. Even though the classes of points on each line, which correspond to the several positions of both Achilles and the tortoise are equivalent, the line representing the path of Achilles is much longer than that representing the path of the tortoise. Achilles may travel much further than the tortoise without successively touching more points. The solution of the paradox involving the arrow in flight requires a word about another type of continuum. It is convenient and certainly familiar to regard time as a continuum. The time continuum has the same properties as the space continuum: the successive instants in any elapsed portion of time, just as the points on a line, may be put into one-to-one correspondence with the class of real numbers; between any two instants of time an infinity of others may be interpolated; time also has the mathematical property mentioned before—it is everywhere dense. Zeno’s argument stated that at every instant of time the arrow was somewhere, in some place or position, and therefore, could not at any instant be in motion. Although the statement that the arrow had at every moment to be in some place is true, the conclusion that, therefore, it could not be moving is absurd. Our natural tendency to accept this absurdity as true springs from our firm conviction that motion is entirely different from rest. We are not confused about the position of a body when it is at rest—we feel there is no mystery about the state of rest. We should feel the same when we consider a body in motion. When a body is at rest, it is in one position at one instant of time and at a later instant it is still in the same position. When a body is in motion, there is a one-to-one correspondence between every instant of time and every new position. To make this clear we may construct two tables: One will describe a body at rest, the other, a body in motion. The “rest” table will tell the life history and the life geography of the Statue of Liberty, while the “motion” table will describe the odyssey of an automobile. The tables indicate that to every instant of time there corresponds a position of the Statue of Liberty and of the taxi. There is a one-to-one space-time correspondence for rest as well as for motion. No paradox is concealed in the puzzle of the arrow when we look at our table. Indeed, it would be strange if there were gaps in the table; if it were impossible, at any instant, to determine exactly what the position of the arrow is. Most of us would swear by the existence of motion, but we are not accustomed to think of it as something which makes an object occupy different positions at different instants of time. We are apt to think that motion endows an object with the strange property of being continually nowhere. Impeded by the limitations of our senses which prevent us from perceiving that an object in motion simply occupies one position after another and does so rather quickly, we foster an illusion about the nature of motion and weave it into a fairy tale. Mathematics helps us to analyze and clarify what we perceive, to a point where we are forced to acknowledge, if we no longer wish to be guided by fairy tales, that we live either in Mr. Russell’s changeless world or in a world where motion is but a form of rest. The story of motion is the same as the story of rest. It is the same story told at a quicker tempo. The story of rest is: “It is here.” The story of motion is: “It is here, it is there.” Because, in this respect, it resembles Hamlet’s father’s ghost is no reason to doubt its existence. Most of our beliefs are chained to less substantial phantoms. Motion is perhaps not easy for our senses to grasp, but with the aid of mathematics, its essence may first be properly understood. At the beginning of the twentieth century it was generally conceded that Cantor’s work had clarified the concept of the infinite so that it could be talked of and treated like any other respectable mathematical concept. The controversy which arises wherever mathematical philosophers meet, on paper, or in person, shows that this was a mistaken view. In its simplest terms this controversy, so far as it concerns the infinite, centers about the questions: Does the infinite exist? Is there such a thing as an infinite class? Such questions can have little meaning unless the term mathematical “existence” is first explained. In his famous “Agony in Eight Fits,” Lewis Carroll hunted the snark. Nobody was acquainted with the snark or knew much about it except that it existed and that it was best to keep away from a boojum. The infinite may be a boojum, too, but its existence in any form is a matter of considerable doubt. Boojum or garden variety, the infinite certainly does not exist in the same sense that we say, “There are fish in the sea.” For that matter, the statement, “There is a number called 7,” refers to something which has a different existence from the fish in the sea. “Existence” in the mathematical sense is wholly different from the existence of objects in the physical world. A billiard ball may have as one of its properties, in addition to whiteness, roundness, hardness, etc., a relation of circumference to diameter involving the number π. We may agree that the billiard ball and π both exist; we must also agree that the billiard ball and π lead different kinds of lives. There have been as many views on the problem of existence since Euclid and Aristotle as there have been philosophers. In modern times, the various schools of mathematical philosophy, the Logistic school, Formalists, and Intuitionists, have all disputed the somewhat less than glassy essence of mathematical being. All these disputes are beyond our ken, our scope, or our intention. A stranger company even than the tortoise, Achilles, and the arrow, have defended the existence of infinite classes—defended it in the same sense that they would defend the existence of the number 7. The Formalists, who think mathematics is a meaningless game, but play it with no less gusto, and the Logistic school, which considers that mathematics is a branch of logic—both have taken Cantor’s part and have defended the alephs. The defense rests on the notion of self-consistency. “Existence” is a metaphysical expression tied up with notions of being and other bugaboos worse even than boojums. But the expression, “self-consistent proposition” sounds like the language of logic and has its odor of sanctity. A proposition which is not self-contradictory is, according to the Logistic school, a true existence statement. From this standpoint the greater part of Cantor’s mathematics of the infinite is unassailable. New problems and new paradoxes, however, have been discovered arising out of parts of Cantor’s structure because of certain difficulties already inherent in classical logic. They center about the use of the word “all.” The paradoxes encountered in ordinary parlance, such as “All generalities are false including this one,” constitute a real problem in the foundations of logic, just as did the Epimenides paradox whence they sprang. In the Epimenides, a Cretan is made to say that all Cretans are liars, which, if true, makes the speaker a liar for telling the truth. To dispose of this type of paradox the Logistic school invented a “Theory of Types.” The theory of types and the axiom of reducibility on which it is based must be accepted as axioms to avoid paradoxes of this kind. In order to accomplish this a reform of classical logic is required which has already been undertaken. Like most reforms it is not wholly satisfactory—even to the reformers—but by means of their theory of types the last vestige of inconsistency has been driven out of the house that