continue..
the boy. “Gets on without all right?” asked the uncle. “Well, he has different names. He was called Sansovino last week.” “Sansovino, eh? Won the Ascot. How did you know his name?” “He always talks about horse-races with Bassett,” said Joan. The uncle was delighted to find that his small nephew was posted with all the racing news. Bassett, the young gardener, who had been wounded in the left foot in the war and had got his present job through Oscar Cresswell, whose batman he had been, was a perfect blade of the “turf.” He lived in the racing events, and the small boy lived with him. Oscar Cresswell got it all from Bassett. “Master Paul comes and asks me, so I can’t do more than tell him, sir,” said Bassett, his face terribly serious, as if he were speaking of religious matters. “And does he ever put anything on a horse he fancies?” “Well—I don’t want to give him away—he’s a young sport, a fine sport, sir. Would you mind asking him yourself? He sort of takes a pleasure in it, and perhaps he’d feel I was giving him away, sir, if you don’t mind.” Bassett was serious as a church. The uncle went back to his nephew, and took him off for a ride in the car. “Say, Paul, old man, do you ever put anything on a horse?” the uncle asked. The boy watched the handsome man closely. “Why, do you think I oughtn’t to?” he parried. “Not a bit of it! I thought perhaps you might give me a tip for the Lincoln.” The car sped on into the country, going down to Uncle Oscar’s place in Hampshire. “Honour bright?” said the nephew. “Honour bright, son!” said the uncle. “Well, then, Daffodil.” “Daffodil! I doubt it, sonny. What about Mirza?” “I only know the winner,” said the boy. “That’s Daffodil.” “Daffodil, eh?” There was a pause. Daffodil was an obscure horse comparatively. “Uncle!” “Yes, son?” “You won’t let it go any further, will you? I promised Bassett.” “Bassett be damned, old man! What’s he got to do with it?” “We’re partners. We’ve been partners from the first. Uncle, he lent me my first five shillings, which I lost. I promised him, honour bright, it was only between me and him; only you gave me that ten-shilling note I started winning with, so I thought you were lucky. You won’t let it go any further, will you?” The boy gazed at his uncle from those big, hot, blue eyes, set rather close together. The uncle stirred and laughed uneasily. “Right you are, son! I’ll keep your tip private. Daffodil, eh? How much are you putting on him?” “All except twenty pounds,” said the boy. “I keep that in reserve.” The uncle thought it a good joke. “You keep twenty pounds in reserve, do you, you young romancer? What are you betting, then?” “I’m betting three hundred,” said the boy gravely. “But it’s between you and me, Uncle Oscar! Honour bright?” The uncle burst into a roar of laughter. “It’s between you and me all right, you young Nat Gould,” he said, laughing. “But where’s your three hundred?” “Bassett keeps it for me. We’re partners.” “You are, are you? And what is Bassett putting on Daffodil?” “He won’t go quite as high as I do, I expect. Perhaps he’ll go a hundred and fifty.” “What, pennies?” laughed the uncle. “Pounds,” said the child, with a surprised look at his uncle. “Bassett keeps a bigger reserve than I do.” Between wonder and amusement Uncle Oscar was silent. He pursued the matter no further, but he determined to take his nephew with him to the Lincoln races. “Now, son,” he said, “I’m putting twenty on Mirza, and I’ll put five for you on any horse you fancy. What’s your pick?” “Daffodil, uncle.” “No, not the fiver on Daffodil!” “I should if it was my own fiver,” said the child. “Good! Good! Right you are! A fiver for me and a fiver for you on Daffodil.” The child had never been to a race-meeting before, and his eyes were blue fire. He pursed his mouth tight, and watched. A Frenchman just in front had put his money on Lancelot. Wild with excitement, he flayed his arms up and down, yelling “Lancelot! Lancelot!” in his French accent. Daffodil came in first, Lancelot second, Mirza third. The child, flushed and with eyes blazing, was curiously serene. His uncle brought him four five-pound notes, four to one. “What am I to do with these?” he cried, waving them before the boy’s eyes. “I suppose we’ll talk to Bassett,” said the boy. “I expect I have fifteen hundred now; and twenty in reserve; and this twenty.” His uncle studied him for some moments. “Look here, son!” he said. “You’re not serious about Bassett and that fifteen hundred, are you?” “Yes, I am. But it’s between you and me, uncle. Honour bright!” “Honour bright all right, son! But I must talk to Bassett.” “If you’d like to be a partner, uncle, with Bassett and me, we could all be partners. Only, you’d have to promise, honour bright, uncle, not to let it go beyond us three. Bassett and I are lucky, and you must be lucky, because it was your ten shillings I started winning with….” Uncle Oscar took both Bassett and Paul into Richmond Park for an afternoon, and there they talked. “It’s like this, you see, sir,” Bassett said. “Master Paul would get me talking about racing events, spinning yarns, you know, sir. And he was always keen on knowing if I’d made or if I’d lost. It’s about a year since, now, that I put five shillings on Blush of Dawn for him—and we lost. Then the luck turned, with that ten shillings he had from you, that we put on Singhalese. And since that time, it’s been pretty steady, all things considering. What do you say, Master Paul?” “We’re all right when we’re sure,” said Paul. “It’s when we’re not quite sure that we go down.” “Oh, but we’re careful then,” said Bassett. “But when are you sure?” smiled Uncle Oscar. “It’s Master Paul, sir,” said Bassett, in a secret, religious voice. “It’s as if he had it from heaven. Like Daffodil, now, for the Lincoln. That was as sure as eggs.” “Did you put anything on Daffodil?” asked Oscar Cresswell. “Yes, sir. I made my bit.” “And my nephew?” Bassett was obstinately silent, looking at Paul. “I made twelve hundred, didn’t I, Bassett? I told uncle I was putting three hundred on Daffodil.” “That’s right,” said Bassett, nodding. “But where’s the money?” asked the uncle. “I keep it safe locked up, sir. Master Paul he can have it any minute he likes to ask for it.” “What, fifteen hundred pounds?” “And twenty! And forty, that is, with the twenty he made on the course.” “It’s amazing!” said the uncle. “If Master Paul offers you to be partners, sir, I would, if I were you; if you’ll excuse me,” said Bassett. Oscar Cresswell thought about it. “I’ll see the money,” he said. They drove home again, and sure enough, Bassett came round to the garden-house with fifteen hundred pounds in notes. The twenty pounds reserve was left with Joe Glee, in the Turf Commission deposit. “You see, it’s all right, uncle, when I’m sure! Then we go strong, for all we’re worth. Don’t we, Bassett?” “We do that, Master Paul.” “And when are you sure?” said the uncle, laughing. “Oh, well, sometimes I’m absolutely sure, like about Daffodil,” said the boy; “and sometimes I have an idea; and sometimes I haven’t even an idea, have I, Bassett? Then we’re careful, because we mostly go down.” “You do? do you! And when you’re sure, like about Daffodil, what makes you sure, sonny?” “Oh, well, I don’t know,” said the boy uneasily. “I’m sure, you know, uncle; that’s all.” “It’s as if he had it from heaven, sir,” Bassett reiterated. “I should say so!” said the uncle. But he became a partner. And when the Leger was coming on, Paul was “sure” about Lively Spark, which was a quite inconsiderable horse. The boy insisted on putting a thousand on the horse, Bassett went for five hundred, and Oscar Cresswell two hundred. Lively Spark came in first, and the betting had been ten to one against him. Paul had made ten thousand. “You see,” he said. “I was absolutely sure of him.” Even Oscar Cresswell had cleared two thousand. “Look here, son,” he said, “this sort of thing makes me nervous.” “It needn’t, uncle! Perhaps I shan’t be sure again for a long time.” “But what are you going to do with your money?” asked the uncle. “Of course,” said the boy, “I started it for mother. She said she had no luck, because father is unlucky, so I thought if I was lucky, it might stop whispering.” “What might stop whispering?” “Our house. I