continue..
love of mischief, which characterizes mankind in all ranks of life, to the honour of Adam’s children be it spoken. Good John Barleycorn also, who always heightens and exaggerates the prevailing passions, be they angry or kindly, was not wanting in his offices on this occasion; and confusion to false friends and hard masters was pledged in more than one tankard. In the meanwhile Mr. Ireby found some amusement in detaining the northern drover at his ancient hall. He caused a cold round of beef to be placed before the Scot in the butler’s pantry, together with a foaming tankard of home-brewed, and took pleasure in seeing the hearty appetite with which these unwonted edibles were discussed by Robin Oig M‘Combich. The squire himself, lighting his pipe, compounded between his patrician dignity and his love of agricultural gossip by walking up and down while he conversed with his guest. “I passed another drove,” said the squire, “with one of your countrymen behind them—they were something less beasts than your drove, doddies most of them—a big man was with them—none of your kilts though, but a decent pair of breeches. D’ye know who he may be?” “Hout aye—that might, could, and would be Hughie Morrison—I didna think he could hae peen sae weel up. He has made a day on us; but his Argyleshires will have wearied shanks. How far was he pehind?” “I think about six or seven miles,” answered the squire, “for I passed them at the Christenbury Crag, and I overtook you at the Hollan Bush. If his beasts be leg-weary, he will maybe be selling bargains.” “Na, na, Hughie Morrison is no the man for pargains—ye maun come to some Highland body like Robin Oig hersell for the like of these—put I maun pe wishing you goot night, and twenty of them let alane ane, and I maun down to the clachan to see if the lad Harry Waakfelt is out of his humdudgeons yet.” The party at the alehouse were still in full talk, and the treachery of Robin Oig still the theme of conversation, when the supposed culprit entered the apartment. His arrival, as usually happens in such a case, put an instant stop to the discussion of which he had furnished the subject, and he was received by the company assembled with that chilling silence which, more than a thousand exclamations, tells an intruder that he is unwelcome. Surprised and offended, but not appalled by the reception which he experienced, Robin entered with an undaunted and even a haughty air, attempted no greeting as he saw he was received with none, and placed himself by the side of the fire, a little apart from a table at which Harry Wakefield, the bailiff, and two or three other persons were seated. The ample Cumbrian kitchen would have afforded plenty of room, even for a larger separation. Robin, thus seated, proceeded to light his pipe, and call for a pint of twopenny. “We have no twopence ale,” answered Ralph Heskett, the landlord; “but as thou findest thy own tobacco, it’s like thou mayest find thy own liquor too—it’s the wont of thy country, I wot.” “Shame, goodman,” said the landlady, a blithe bustling house-wife, hastening herself to supply the guest with liquor, “thou knowest well enow what the strange man wants, and it’s thy trade to be civil, man. Thou shouldst know that if the Scot likes a small pot, he pays a sure penny.” Without taking any notice of this nuptial dialogue, the Highlander took the flagon in his hand, and addressing the company generally, drank the interesting toast of “Good markets” to the party assembled. “The better that the wind blew fewer dealers from the north,” said one of the farmers, “and fewer Highland runts to eat up the English meadows.” “Saul of my pody, put you are wrang there, my friend,” answered Robin, with composure, “it is your fat Englishmen that eat up our Scots cattle, puir things.” “I wish there was a summat to eat up their drovers,” said another; “a plain Englishman canna make bread within a kenning of them.” “Or an honest servant keep his master’s favour, but they will come sliding in between him and the sunshine,” said the bailiff. “If these pe jokes,” said Robin Oig, with the same composure, “there is ower mony jokes upon one man.” “It is no joke, but downright earnest,” said the bailiff. “Harkye, Mr. Robin Ogg, or whatever is your name, it’s right we should tell you that we are all of one opinion, and that is that you, Mr. Robin Ogg, have behaved to our friend Mr. Harry Wakefield here, like a raff and a blackguard.” “Nae doubt, nae doubt,” answered Robin, with great composure; “and you are a set of very pretty judges, for whose prains or pehaviour I wad not gie a pinch of sneeshing. If Mr. Harry Waakfelt kens where he is wranged, he kens where he may be righted.” “He speaks truth,” said Wakefield, who had listened to what passed, divided between the offence which he had taken at Robin’s late behaviour, and the revival of his habitual feelings of regard. He now arose, and went towards Robin, who got up from his seat as he approached, and held out his hand. “That’s right, Harry—go it—serve him out,” resounded on all sides, “tip him the nailer—show him the mill.” “Hold your peace all of you, and be—,” said Wakefield; and then addressing his comrade, he took him by the extended hand, with something alike of respect and defiance. “Robin,” he said, “thou hast used me ill enough this day; but if you mean, like a frank fellow, to shake hands, and make a tussle for love on the sod, why I’ll forgie thee, man, and we shall be better friends than ever.” “And would it not pe petter to pe cood friends without more of the matter?” said Robin; “we will be much petter friendships with our panes hale than proken.” Harry Wakefield dropped the hand of his friend, or rather threw it from him. “I did not think I had been keeping company for three years with a coward.” “Coward pelongs to none of my name,” said Robin, whose eyes began to kindle, but keeping the command of his temper. “It was no coward’s legs or hands, Harry Waakfelt, that drew you out of the fords of Frew when you was drifting ower the plack rock, and every eel in the river expected his share of you.” “And that is true enough, too,” said the Englishman, struck by the appeal. “Adzooks!” exclaimed the bailiff, “sure Harry Wakefield, the nattiest lad at Whitson Tryste, Wooler Fair, Carlisle Sands, or Stagshaw Bank, is not going to show white feather? Ah, this comes of living so long with kilts and bonnets—men forget the use of their daddles.” “I may teach you, Master Fleecebumpkin, that I have not lost the use of mine,” said Wakefield, and then went on. “This will never do, Robin. We must have a turn-up, or we shall be the talk of the countryside. I’ll be d——d if I hurt thee—I’ll put on the gloves gin thou like. Come, stand forward like a man.” “To pe peaten like a dog,” said Robin; “is there any reason in that? If you think I have done you wrong, I’ll go before your shudge, though I neither know his law nor his language.” A general cry of “No, no—no law, no lawyer! a bellyful and be friends,” was echoed by the bystanders. “But,” continued Robin, “if I am to fight, I’ve no skill to fight like a jackanapes, with hands and nails.” “How would you fight, then?” said his antagonist; “though I am thinking it would be hard to bring you to the scratch anyhow.” “I would fight with proadswords, and sink point on the first plood drawn, like a gentlemans.” A loud shout of laughter followed the proposal, which indeed had rather escaped from poor Robin’s swelling heart than been the dictate of his sober judgement. “Gentleman, quotha!” was echoed on all sides, with a shout of unextinguishable laughter; “a very pretty gentleman, God wot. Canst get two swords for the gentlemen to fight with, Ralph Heskett?” “No, but I can send to the armoury at Carlisle and lend them two forks to be making shift with in the meantime.” “Tush, man,” said another, “the bonny Scots come into the world with the blue bonnet on their heads, and dirk and pistol at their belt.” “Best send post,” said Mr. Fleecebumpkin, “to the squire of Corby Castle, to come and stand second to the gentleman.” In the midst of this torrent of general ridicule, the Highlander instinctively griped beneath the folds of his plaid. “But it’s better not,” he said in his own language. “A hundred curses on the swine-eaters, who know neither decency nor civility!” “Make room, the pack of you,” he said, advancing to the door.