continue..
a leading article ready; and if the Mayor refuses to take the matter up— Dr. Stockmann. How can you suppose such a thing possible? Hovstad. It is conceivable. And in that case— Dr. Stockmann. In that case I promise you—. Look here, in that case you may print my report—every word of it. Hovstad. May I? Have I your word for it? Dr. Stockmann (giving him the manuscript). Here it is; take it with you. It can do no harm for you to read it through, and you can give it me back later on. Hovstad. Good, good! That is what I will do. And now good-by, Doctor. Dr. Stockmann. Good-by, good-by. You will see everything will run quite smoothly, Mr. Hovstad—quite smoothly. Hovstad. Hm!—we shall see. (Bows and goes out.) Dr. Stockmann (opens the dining room door and looks in). Katherine! Oh, you are back, Petra? Petra (coming in). Yes, I have just come from the school. Mrs. Stockmann (coming in). Has he not been here yet? Dr. Stockmann. Peter? No. But I have had a long talk with Hovstad. He is quite excited about my discovery. I find it has a much wider bearing than I at first imagined. And he has put his paper at my disposal if necessity should arise. Mrs. Stockmann. Do you think it will? Dr. Stockmann. Not for a moment. But at all events it makes me feel proud to know that I have the liberal-minded independent press on my side. Yes, and—just imagine—I have had a visit from the Chairman of the Householders’ Association! Mrs. Stockmann. Oh! What did he want? Dr. Stockmann. To offer me his support too. They will support me in a body if it should be necessary. Katherine—do you know what I have got behind me? Mrs. Stockmann. Behind you? No, what have you got behind you? Dr. Stockmann. The compact majority. Mrs. Stockmann. Really? Is that a good thing for you, Thomas? Dr. Stockmann. I should think it was a good thing. (Walks up and down rubbing his hands.) By Jove, it’s a fine thing to feel this bond of brotherhood between oneself and one’s fellow citizens! Petra. And to be able to do so much that is good and useful, father! Dr. Stockmann. And for one’s own native town into the bargain, my child! Mrs. Stockmann. That was a ring at the bell. Dr. Stockmann. It must be he, then. (A knock is heard at the door.) Come in! Peter Stockmann (comes in from the hall). Good morning. Dr. Stockmann. Glad to see you, Peter! Mrs. Stockmann. Good morning, Peter. How are you? Peter Stockmann. So so, thank you. (To dr. stockmann.) I received from you yesterday, after office hours, a report dealing with the condition of the water at the Baths. Dr. Stockmann. Yes. Have you read it? Peter Stockmann. Yes, I have. Dr. Stockmann. And what have you to say to it? Peter Stockmann (with a sidelong glance). Hm!— Mrs. Stockmann. Come along, Petra. (She and petra go into the room on the left.) Peter Stockmann (after a pause). Was it necessary to make all these investigations behind my back? Dr. Stockmann. Yes, because until I was absolutely certain about it— Peter Stockmann. Then you mean that you are absolutely certain now? Dr. Stockmann. Surely you are convinced of that. Peter Stockmann. Is it your intention to bring this document before the Baths Committee as a sort of official communication? Dr. Stockmann. Certainly. Something must be done in the matter—and that quickly. Peter Stockmann. As usual, you employ violent expressions in your report. You say, among other things, that what we offer visitors in our Baths is a permanent supply of poison. Dr. Stockmann. Well, can you describe it any other way, Peter! Just think—water that is poisonous, whether you drink it or bathe in it! And this we offer to the poor sick folk who come to us trustfully and pay us at an exorbitant rate to be made well again! Peter Stockmann. And your reasoning leads you to this conclusion, that we must build a sewer to draw off the alleged impurities from Mölledal and must relay the water conduits. Dr. Stockmann. Yes. Do you see any other way out of it? I don’t. Peter Stockmann. I made a pretext this morning to go and see the town engineer, and, as if only half seriously, broached the subject of these proposals as a thing we might perhaps have to take under consideration some time later on. Dr. Stockmann. Some time later on! Peter Stockmann. He smiled at what he considered to be my extravagance, naturally. Have you taken the trouble to consider what your proposed alterations would cost? According to the information I obtained, the expenses would probably mount up to fifteen or twenty thousand pounds. Dr. Stockmann. Would it cost so much? Peter Stockmann. Yes; and the worst part of it would be that the work would take at least two years. Dr. Stockmann. Two years? Two whole years? Peter Stockmann. At least. And what are we to do with the Baths in the meantime? Close them? Indeed we should be obliged to. And do you suppose anyone would come near the place after it had got about that the water was dangerous? Dr. Stockmann. Yes, but, Peter, that is what it is. Peter Stockmann. And all this at this juncture—just as the Baths are beginning to be known. There are other towns in the neighborhood with qualifications to attract visitors for bathing purposes. Don’t you suppose they would immediately strain every nerve to divert the entire stream of strangers to themselves? Unquestionably they would; and then where should we be? We should probably have to abandon the whole thing, which has cost us so much money—and then you would have ruined your native town. Dr. Stockmann. I—should have ruined—! Peter Stockmann. It is simply and solely through the Baths that the town has before it any future worth mentioning. You know that just as well as I. Dr. Stockmann. But what do you think ought to be done, then? Peter Stockmann. Your report has not convinced me that the condition of the water at the Baths is as bad as you represent it to be. Dr. Stockmann. I tell you it is even worse!—or at all events it will be in summer, when the warm weather comes. Peter Stockmann. As I said, I believe you exaggerate the matter considerably. A capable physician ought to know what measures to take—he ought to be capable of preventing injurious influences or of remedying them if they become obviously persistent. Dr. Stockmann. Well? What more? Peter Stockmann. The water supply for the Baths is now an established fact, and in consequence must be treated as such. But probably the Committee, at its discretion, will not be disinclined to consider the question of how far it might be possible to introduce certain improvements consistently with a reasonable expenditure. Dr. Stockmann. And do you suppose that I will have anything to do with such a piece of trickery as that? Peter Stockmann. Trickery!! Dr. Stockmann. Yes, it would be a trick—a fraud, a lie, a downright crime towards the public, towards the whole community! Peter Stockmann. I have not, as I remarked before, been able to convince myself that there is actually any imminent danger. Dr. Stockmann. You have! It is impossible that you should not be convinced. I know I have represented the facts absolutely truthfully and fairly. And you know it very well, Peter, only you won’t acknowledge it. It was owing to your action that both the Baths and the water conduits were built where they are; and that is what you won’t acknowledge—that damnable blunder of yours. Pooh!—do you suppose I don’t see through you? Peter Stockmann. And even if that were true? If I perhaps guard my reputation somewhat anxiously, it is in the interests of the town. Without moral authority I am powerless to direct public affairs as seems, to my judgment, to be best for the common good. And on that account—and for various other reasons too—it appears to me to be a matter of importance that your report should not be delivered to the Committee. In the interests of the public, you must withhold it. Then, later on, I will raise the question and we will do our best, privately; but nothing of this unfortunate affair—not a single word of it—must come to the ears of the public. Dr. Stockmann. I am afraid you will not be able to prevent that now, my dear Peter. Peter Stockmann. It must and shall be prevented. Dr. Stockmann. It is no use, I tell you. There are too many people that know about it. Peter Stockmann. That know about it? Who? Surely you don’t mean those fellows on the “People’s Messenger”? Dr. Stockmann. Yes, they know. The liberal-minded independent press is going to see that you do your duty. Peter Stockmann