continue..
three-dimensional geometries. The minds that space of four dimensions does not repel will see no difficulty in it, but they are few. I prefer therefore to proceed otherwise. Consider a certain plane, which I shall call the fundamental plane, and construct a sort of dictionary, by making correspond each to each a double series of terms written in two columns, just as correspond in the ordinary dictionaries the words of two languages whose significance is the same: Space: Portion of space situated above the fundamental plane. Plane: Sphere cutting the fundamental plane orthogonally. Straight line: Circle cutting the fundamental plane orthogonally. Sphere: Sphere. Circle: Circle. Angle: Angle. Distance between two points: Logarithm of the cross ratio of these two points and the intersections of the fundamental plane with a circle passing through these two points and cutting it orthogonally. Etc., etc. Now take Lobachevski’s theorems and translate them with the aid of this dictionary as we translate a German text with the aid of a German-English dictionary. We shall thus obtain theorems of the ordinary geometry. For example, that theorem of Lobachevski: “the sum of the angles of a triangle is less than two right angles” is translated thus: “If a curvilinear triangle has for sides circle-arcs which prolonged would cut orthogonally the fundamental plane, the sum of the angles of this curvilinear triangle will be less than two right angles.” Thus, however far the consequences of Lobachevski’s hypotheses are pushed, they will never lead to a contradiction. In fact, if two of Lobachevski’s theorems were contradictory, it would be the same with the translations of these two theorems, made by the aid of our dictionary, but these translations are theorems of ordinary geometry and no one doubts that the ordinary geometry is free from contradiction. Whence comes this certainty and is it justified? That is a question I cannot treat here because it would require to be enlarged upon, but which is very interesting and I think not insoluble. Nothing remains then of the objection above formulated. This is not all. Lobachevski’s geometry, susceptible of a concrete interpretation, ceases to be a vain logical exercise and is capable of applications; I have not the time to speak here of these applications, nor of the aid that Klein and I have gotten from them for the integration of linear differential equations. This interpretation moreover is not unique, and several dictionaries analogous to the preceding could be constructed, which would enable us by a simple “translation” to transform Lobachevski’s theorems into theorems of ordinary geometry. The Implicit Axioms. Are the axioms explicitly enunciated in our treatises the sole foundations of geometry? We may be assured of the contrary by noticing that after they are successively abandoned there are still left over some propositions common to the theories of Euclid, Lobachevski and Riemann. These propositions must rest on premises the geometers admit without enunciation. It is interesting to try to disentangle them from the classic demonstrations. [John] Stuart Mill has claimed that every definition contains an axiom, because in defining one affirms implicitly the existence of the object defined. This is going much too far; it is rare that in mathematics a definition is given without its being followed by the demonstration of the existence of the object defined, and when this is dispensed with it is generally because the reader can easily supply it. It must not be forgotten that the word existence has not the same sense when it refers to a mathematical entity and when it is a question of a material object. A mathematical entity exists, provided its definition implies no contradiction, either in itself, or with the propositions already admitted. But if Stuart Mill’s observation cannot be applied to all definitions, it is none the less just for some of them. The plane is sometimes defined as follows: The plane is a surface such that the straight line which joins any two of its points is wholly on this surface. This definition manifestly hides a new axiom; it is true we might change it, and that would be preferable, but then we should have to enunciate the axiom explicitly. Other definitions would suggest reflections not less important. Such, for example, is that of the equality of two figures; two figures are equal when they can be superposed; to superpose them one must be displaced until it coincides with the other; but how shall it be displaced? If we should ask this, no doubt we should be told that it must be done without altering the shape and as a rigid solid. The vicious circle would then be evident. In fact this definition defines nothing; it would have no meaning for a being living in a world where there were only fluids. If it seems clear to us, that is because we are used to the properties of natural solids which do not differ much from those of the ideal solids, all of whose dimensions are invariable. Yet, imperfect as it may be, this definition implies an axiom. The possibility of the motion of a rigid figure is not a self-evident truth, or at least it is so only in the fashion of Euclid’s postulate and not as an analytic judgment a priori would be. Moreover, in studying the definitions and the demonstrations of geometry, we see that one is obliged to admit without proof not only the possibility of this motion, but some of its properties besides. This is at once seen from the definition of the straight line. Many defective definitions have been given, but the true one is that which is implied in all the demonstrations where the straight line enters: “It may happen that the motion of a rigid figure is such that all the points of a line belonging to this figure remain motionless while all the points situated outside of this line move. Such a line will be called a straight line.” We have designedly, in this enunciation, separated the definition from the axiom it implies. Many demonstrations, such as those of the cases of the equality of triangles, of the possibility of dropping a perpendicular from a point to a straight line, presume propositions which are not enunciated, for they require the admission that it is possible to transport a figure in a certain way in space. The Fourth Geometry. Among these implicit axioms, there is one which seems to me to merit some attention, because when it is abandoned a fourth geometry can be constructed as coherent as those of Euclid, Lobachevski and Riemann. To prove that a perpendicular may always be erected at a point A to a straight line AB, we consider a straight line AC movable around the point A and initially coincident with the fixed straight line AB; and we make it turn about the point A until it comes into the prolongation of AB. Thus two propositions are presupposed: First, that such a rotation is possible, and next that it may be continued until the two straight lines come into the prolongation one of the other. If the first point is admitted and the second rejected, we are led to a series of theorems even stranger than those of Lobachevski and Riemann, but equally exempt from contradiction. I shall cite only one of these theorems and that not the most singular: A real straight line may be perpendicular to itself. Lie’s Theorem. The number of axioms implicitly introduced in the classic demonstrations is greater than necessary, and it would be interesting to reduce it to a minimum. It may first be asked whether this reduction is possible, whether the number of necessary axioms and that of imaginable geometries are not infinite. A theorem of Sophus Lie dominates this whole discussion. It may be thus enunciated: Suppose the following premises are admitted: (1) Space has n dimensions. (2) The motion of a rigid figure is possible. (3) It requires p conditions to determine the position of this figure in space. The number of geometries compatible with these premises will be limited. I may even add that if n is given, a superior limit can be assigned to p. If, therefore, the possibility of motion is admitted, there can be invented only a finite (and even a rather small) number of three-dimensional geometries. Riemann’s Geometries. Yet this result seems contradicted by Riemann, for this savant constructs an infinity of different geometries, and that to which his name is ordinarily given is only a particular case. All depends, he says, on how the length of a curve is defined. Now, there is an infinity of ways of defining this length, and each of them may be the starting point of a new geometry. That is perfectly true, but most of these definitions are incompatible with the motion of a rigid figure, which in the theorem of Lie is supposed possible. These geometries of Riemann, in many ways so interesting, could never therefore be other than purely analytic and