Work: The School for Scandal Field: school for scandal Author: Richard Sheridan Title: ACT III Title: SCENE I—SIR PETER’S Sir Peter. Well, then—we will see this fellow first, and have our wine afterwards. But how is this, Master Rowley? I don’t see the jet of your scheme. Rowley. Why, sir, this Mr. Stanley, whom I was speaking of, is nearly related to them, by their mother; he was once a merchant in Dublin, but has been ruined by a series of undeserved misfortunes. He has applied, by letter, since his confinement, both to Mr. Surface and Charles—from the former he has received nothing but evasive promises of future service, while Charles has done all that his extravagance has left him power to do; and he is, at this time, endeavouring to raise a sum of money, part of which, in the midst of his own distresses, I know he intends for the service of poor Stanley. Sir Oliver. Ah! he is my brother’s son. Sir Peter. Well, but how is Sir Oliver personally to— Rowley. Why, sir, I will inform Charles and his brother that Stanley has obtained permission to apply in person to his friends, and, as they have neither of them ever seen him, let Sir Oliver assume his character, and he will have a fair opportunity of judging at least of the benevolence of their dispositions; and believe me, sir, you will find in the youngest brother one who, in the midst of folly and dissipation, has still, as our immortal bard expresses it— Poem ```a tear for pity, and a hand Open as day, for melting charity.``` Sir Peter. Psha! What signifies his having an open hand or purse either, when he has nothing left to give? Well, well, make the trial, if you please; but where is the fellow whom you brought for Sir Oliver to examine, relative to Charles’s affairs? Rowley. Below, waiting his commands, and no one can give him better intelligence. This, Sir Oliver, is a friendly Jew, who, to do him justice, has done everything in his power to bring your nephew to a proper sense of his extravagance. Sir Peter. Pray let us have him in. Rowley. Desire Mr. Moses to walk upstairs. Sir Peter. But why should you suppose he will speak the truth? Rowley. Oh, I have convinced him that he has no chance of recovering certain sums advanced to Charles but through the bounty of Sir Oliver, who he knows is arrived; so that you may depend on his fidelity to his [own] interest. I have also another evidence in my power, one Snake, whom I have detected in a matter little short of forgery, and shall shortly produce to remove some of your prejudices, Sir Peter, relative to Charles and Lady Teazle. Sir Peter. I have heard too much on that subject. Rowley. Here comes the honest Israelite. Enter moses. —This is Sir Oliver. Sir Oliver. Sir, I understand you have lately had great dealings with my nephew Charles. Moses. Yes, Sir Oliver—I have done all I could for him, but he was ruined before he came to me for assistance. Sir Oliver. That was unlucky, truly—for you have had no opportunity of showing your talents. Moses. None at all—I hadn’t the pleasure of knowing his distresses—till he was some thousands worse than nothing. Sir Oliver. Unfortunate, indeed! But I suppose you have done all in your power for him, honest Moses? Moses. Yes, he knows that. This very evening I was to have brought him a gentleman from the city, who doesn’t know him, and will, I believe, advance him some money. Sir Peter. What, one Charles has never had money from before? Moses. Yes; Mr. Premium, of Crutched Friars—formerly a broker. Sir Peter. Egad, Sir Oliver, a thought strikes me!—Charles, you say, doesn’t know Mr. Premium? Moses. Not at all. Sir Peter. Now then, Sir Oliver, you may have a better opportunity of satisfying yourself than by an old romancing tale of a poor relation; go with my friend Moses, and represent Mr. Premium, and then, I’ll answer for’t, you will see your nephew in all his glory. Sir Oliver. Egad, I like this idea better than the other, and I may visit Joseph afterwards, as old Stanley. Sir Peter. True—so you may. Rowley. Well, this is taking Charles rather at a disadvantage, to be sure. However, Moses—you understand Sir Peter, and will be faithful? Moses. You may depend upon me—this is near the time I was to have gone. Sir Oliver. I’ll accompany you as soon as you please, Moses; but hold! I have forgot one thing—how the plague shall I be able to pass for a Jew? Moses. There’s no need—the principal is Christian. Sir Oliver. Is he?—I’m sorry to hear it—but, then again, an’t I rather too smartly dressed to look like a money-lender? Sir Peter. Not at all; ’twould not be out of character, if you went in your own carriage—would it, Moses? Moses. Not in the least. Sir Oliver. Well, but how must I talk? there’s certainly some cant of usury, and mode of treating, that I ought to know. Sir Peter. Oh, there’s not much to learn—the great point, as I take it, is to be exorbitant enough in your demands—hey, Moses? Moses. Yes, that’s a very great point. Sir Oliver. I’ll answer for’t I’ll not be wanting in that. I’ll ask him eight or ten per cent on the loan, at least. Moses. If you ask him no more than that, you’ll be discovered immediately. Sir Oliver. Hey! what the plague! how much then? Moses. That depends upon the circumstances. If he appears not very anxious for the supply, you should require only forty or fifty per cent; but if you find him in great distress, and want the moneys very bad—you may ask double. Sir Peter. A good honest trade you’re learning, Sir Oliver! Sir Oliver. Truly I think so—and not unprofitable. Moses. Then, you know, you haven’t the moneys yourself, but are forced to borrow them for him of a friend. Sir Oliver. Oh! I borrow it of a friend, do I? Moses. Yes, and your friend is an unconscionable dog, but you can’t help it. Sir Oliver. My friend is an unconscionable dog, is he? Moses. Yes, and he himself has not the moneys by him—but is forced to sell stock at a great loss. Sir Oliver. He is forced to sell stock, is he, at a great loss, is he? Well, that’s very kind of him. Sir Peter. I’faith, Sir Oliver—Mr. Premium, I mean—you’ll soon be master of the trade. But, Moses! wouldn’t you have him run out a little against the Annuity Bill? That would be in character, I should think. Moses. Very much. Rowley. And lament that a young man now must be at years of discretion before he is suffered to ruin himself? Moses. Aye, great pity! Sir Peter. And abuse the public for allowing merit to an act whose only object is to snatch misfortune and imprudence from the rapacious relief of usury, and give the minor a chance of inheriting his estate without being undone by coming into possession. Sir Oliver. So, so—Moses shall give me further instructions as we go together. Sir Peter. You will not have much time, for your nephew lives hard by. Sir Oliver. Oh, never fear! my tutor appears so able, that though Charles lived in the next street, it must be my own fault if I am not a complete rogue before I turn the corner. (Exeunt sir oliver and moses.) Sir Peter. So now I think Sir Oliver will be convinced; you are partial, Rowley, and would have prepared Charles for the other plot. Rowley. No, upon my word, Sir Peter. Sir Peter. Well, go bring me this Snake, and I’ll hear what he has to say presently. I see Maria, and want to speak with her. (Exit rowley.) I should be glad to be convinced my suspicions of Lady Teazle and Charles were unjust. I have never yet opened my mind on this subject to my friend Joseph—I’m determined I will do it—he will give me his opinion sincerely. Enter maria. So, child, has Mr. Surface returned with you? Maria. No, sir—he was engaged. Sir Peter. Well, Maria, do you not reflect, the more you converse with that amiable young man, what return his partiality for you deserves? Maria. Indeed, Sir Peter, your frequent importunity on this subject distresses me extremely—you compel me to declare, that I know no man who has ever paid me a particular attention whom I would not prefer to Mr. Surface. Sir Peter. So—here’s perverseness! No, no, Maria, ’tis Charles only whom you would prefer—’tis evident his vices and follies have won your heart. Maria. This is unkind, sir—you know I have obeyed you in neither seeing nor corresponding with him; I have heard enough to convince me that he is unworthy my regard. Yet