continue..
Baths coming to nothing if they failed us. But now the scheme has been carried through, and we can dispense with these grand gentlemen. Dr. Stockmann. Dispense with them, yes; but we owe them a great debt of gratitude. Hovstad. That shall be recognized ungrudgingly. But a journalist of my democratic tendencies cannot let such an opportunity as this slip. The bubble of official infallibility must be pricked. This superstition must be destroyed, like any other. Dr. Stockmann. I am whole heartedly with you in that, Mr. Hovstad; if it is a superstition, away with it! Hovstad. I should be very reluctant to bring the Mayor into it, because he is your brother. But I am sure you will agree with me that truth should be the first consideration. Dr. Stockmann. That goes without saying. (With sudden emphasis.) Yes, but—but— Hovstad. You must not misjudge me. I am neither more self-interested nor more ambitious than most men. Dr. Stockmann. My dear fellow—who suggests anything of the kind? Hovstad. I am of humble origin, as you know; and that has given me opportunities of knowing what is the most crying need in the humbler ranks of life. It is that they should be allowed some part in the direction of public affairs, Doctor. That is what will develop their faculties and intelligence and self-respect— Dr. Stockmann. I quite appreciate that. Hovstad. Yes—and in my opinion a journalist incurs a heavy responsibility if he neglects a favorable opportunity of emancipating the masses—the humble and oppressed. I know well enough that in exalted circles I shall be called an agitator, and all that sort of thing; but they may call what they like. If only my conscience doesn’t reproach me, then— Dr. Stockmann. Quite right! Quite right, Mr. Hovstad. But all the same—devil take it! (A knock is heard at the door.) Come in! aslaksen appears at the door . He is poorly but decently dressed, in black, with a slightly crumpled white neckcloth; he wears gloves and has a felt hat in his hand. Aslaksen (bowing). Excuse my taking the liberty, Doctor— Dr. Stockmann (getting up). Ah, it is you, Aslaksen! Aslaksen. Yes, Doctor. Hovstad (standing up). Is it me you want, Aslaksen? Aslaksen. No; I didn’t know I should find you here. No, it was the Doctor I— Dr. Stockmann. I am quite at your service. What is it? Aslaksen. Is what I heard from Mr. Billing true, sir—that you mean to improve our water supply? Dr. Stockmann. Yes, for the Baths. Aslaksen. Quite so, I understand. Well, I have come to say that I will back that up by every means in my power. Hovstad (to the doctor). You see! Dr. Stockmann. I shall be very grateful to you, but— Aslaksen. Because it may be no bad thing to have us small tradesmen at your back. We form, as it were, a compact majority in the town—if we choose. And it is always a good thing to have the majority with you, Doctor. Dr. Stockmann. That is undeniably true; but I confess I don’t see why such unusual precautions should be necessary in this case. It seems to me that such a plain, straightforward thing— Aslaksen. Oh, it may be very desirable, all the same. I know our local authorities so well; officials are not generally very ready to act on proposals that come from other people. That is why I think it would not be at all amiss if we made a little demonstration. Hovstad. That’s right. Dr. Stockmann. Demonstration, did you say? What on earth are you going to make a demonstration about? Aslaksen. We shall proceed with the greatest moderation, Doctor. Moderation is always my aim; it is the greatest virtue in a citizen—at least, I think so. Dr. Stockmann. It is well known to be a characteristic of yours, Mr. Aslaksen. Aslaksen. Yes, I think I may pride myself on that. And this matter of the water supply is of the greatest importance to us small tradesmen. The Baths promise to be a regular gold mine for the town. We shall all make our living out of them, especially those of us who are householders. That is why we will back up the project as strongly as possible. And as I am at present Chairman of the Householders’ Association— Dr. Stockmann. Yes—? Aslaksen. And, what is more, local secretary of the Temperance Society—you know, sir, I suppose, that I am a worker in the temperance cause? Dr. Stockmann. Of course, of course. Aslaksen. Well, you can understand that I come into contact with a great many people. And as I have the reputation of a temperate and law-abiding citizen—like yourself Doctor—I have a certain influence in the town, a little bit of power, if I may be allowed to say so. Dr. Stockmann. I know that quite well, Mr. Aslaksen. Aslaksen. So you see it would be an easy matter for me to set on foot some testimonial, if necessary. Dr. Stockmann. A testimonial? Aslaksen. Yes, some kind of an address of thanks from the townsmen for your share in a matter of such importance to the community. I need scarcely say that it would have to be drawn up with the greatest regard to moderation, so as not to offend the authorities—who, after all, have the reins in their hands. If we pay strict attention to that, no one can take it amiss, I should think! Hovstad. Well, and even supposing they didn’t like it— Aslaksen. No, no, no; there must be no discourtesy to the authorities, Mr. Hovstad. It is no use falling foul of those upon whom our welfare so closely depends. I have done that in my time, and no good ever comes of it. But no one can take exception to a reasonable and frank expression of a citizen’s views. Dr. Stockmann (shaking him by the hand). I can’t tell you, dear Mr. Aslaksen, how extremely pleased I am to find such hearty support among my fellow citizens. I am delighted—delighted! Now, you will take a small glass of sherry, eh? Aslaksen. No, thank you; I never drink alcohol of that kind. Dr. Stockmann. Well, what do you say to a glass of beer, then? Aslaksen. Nor that either, thank you, Doctor. I never drink anything as early as this. I am going into town now to talk this over with one or two householders, and prepare the ground. Dr. Stockmann. It is tremendously kind of you, Mr. Aslaksen; but I really cannot understand the necessity for all these precautions. It seems to me that the thing should go of itself. Aslaksen. The authorities are somewhat slow to move, Doctor. Far be it from me to seem to blame them— Hovstad. We are going to stir them up in the paper tomorrow, Aslaksen. Aslaksen. But not violently, I trust, Mr. Hovstad. Proceed with moderation, or you will do nothing with them. You may take my advice; I have gathered my experience in the school of life. Well, I must say good-by, Doctor. You know now that we small tradesmen are at your back at all events, like a solid wall. You have the compact majority on your side, Doctor. Dr. Stockmann. I am very much obliged, dear Mr. Aslaksen. (Shakes hands with him.) Good-by, good-by. Aslaksen. Are you going my way, towards the printing office, Mr. Hovstad? Hovstad. I will come later; I have something to settle up first. Aslaksen. Very well. (Bows and goes out; stockmann follows him into the hall.) Hovstad (as stockmann comes in again). Well, what do you think of that, Doctor? Don’t you think it is high time we stirred a little life into all this slackness and vacillation and cowardice? Dr. Stockmann. Are you referring to Aslaksen? Hovstad. Yes, I am. He is one of those who are floundering in a bog—decent enough fellow though he may be, otherwise. And most of the people here are in just the same case—seesawing and edging first to one side and then to the other, so overcome with caution and scruple that they never dare to take any decided step. Dr. Stockmann. Yes, but Aslaksen seemed to me so thoroughly well intentioned. Hovstad. There is one thing I esteem higher than that; and that is for a man to be self-reliant and sure of himself. Dr. Stockmann. I think you are perfectly right there. Hovstad. That is why I want to seize this opportunity, and try if I cannot manage to put a little virility into these well-intentioned people for once. The idol of Authority must be shattered in this town. This gross and inexcusable blunder about the water supply must be brought home to the mind of every municipal voter. Dr. Stockmann. Very well; if you are of opinion that it is for the good of the community, so be it. But not until I have had a talk with my brother. Hovstad. Anyway, I will get