continue..
men with great calmness, just as they are; I accustom myself to bear with what they do; and I think that at court, as well as in the city, my phlegm is as much a philosopher as your choler. Alcestes. But this phlegm, sir, which reasons so nicely, this same phlegm, can nothing ruffle it? Should it happen by chance that a friend should betray you, that a subtle plot were formed to get your estate, or that people should endeavour to spread ill reports of you, could you see all this, without putting yourself in a passion? Philintes. Yes, I look upon these defects that you make such a noise about as vices linked with human nature; and in short, my mind is no more shocked to see a man a knave, unjust, dishonest, selfish, than to see a vulture ravenous after carnage, apes mischievous, and wolves full of rage. Alcestes. Shall I see myself betrayed, torn to pieces, robbed, without being—Plague! I won’t talk at all, this is such an impertinent way of reasoning. Philintes. Faith, you will do well to hold your tongue. Exclaim something less against your antagonist, and bestow part of your care on your lawsuit. Alcestes. I won’t bestow any upon it, I have said it. Philintes. But who then do you expect should solicit for you? Alcestes. Who do I expect? Reason, my just right, equity. Philintes. Shall you pay no visit to any of the judges? Alcestes. No; what, is my cause unjust, or dubious? Philintes. I grant ye, but canvassing is a plaguy thing, and— Alcestes. No, I am determined not to move one step. I am in the wrong, or I am in the right. Philintes. Don’t you trust to that. Alcestes. I shan’t stir. Philintes. Your adversary is strong, and may by caballing draw— Alcestes. It signifies nothing. Philintes. You’ll be deceived. Alcestes. Be it so. I’ll see the success of it. Philintes. But— Alcestes. I shall have the pleasure to lose my suit. Philintes. But in short— Alcestes. I shall see by this trial whether men will have impudence enough, will be wicked, villainous, perverse enough to do me injustice in the face of all the world. Philintes. What a strange man! Alcestes. I wish, though it cost me a great deal, that for the pleasantness of the thing, I had lost my cause. Philintes. In good earnest, Alcestes, people would laugh at you, did they hear you talk in this manner. Alcestes. So much the worse for him that laughed. Philintes. But this rectitude, which you require in everything with so much exactness, this absolute integrity that you entrench yourself in, do you find it in the person you are in love with? I’m astonished, for my part, that since, as it should seem, you and human nature are by the ears together, yet in spite of all that can render it odious to you, you should have found that in it which charms your eyes. And what surprises me still the more is that strange choice your heart is fixed upon. The sincere Éliante has an inclination for you, the prude Arsinoé casts a sheep’s eye upon you; in the meantime your heart rejects their passion, whilst Célimène amuses it in her chains, whose coquettish humour and slanderous temper seem to give in so strongly to the manners of the times. Whence comes it that, bearing so mortal a hatred to these, you should easily bear with such a degree of ’em as this fair one possesses? Are they no longer defects in so sweet an object? Don’t you see them? Or do you excuse ’em? Alcestes. No, the passion I have for this young widow does not shut my eyes against the defects one sees in her, and with what ardour soever she may have inspired me, I am the first to see them, as I am to condemn them. But, with all this, do what I can, I confess my foible, she has the art of pleasing me: in vain I see her faults, in vain I blame them, in spite of me she makes me love her; her agreeableness turns the scale, and without doubt my affection will be able to rid her mind of these vices of the times. Philintes. If you do that, you do not do a little. You believe then, that you are beloved by her? Alcestes. Yes, troth, I should not love her at all if I did not think so. Philintes. But if her affection for you discovers itself plainly, whence comes it that your rivals give you so much uneasiness? Alcestes. ’Tis because a heart thoroughly smitten would have the person wholly to itself; and I come here only with the design of telling her everything my passion inspires me with upon that head. Philintes. For my part, had I nothing to do but give way to love, her cousin Éliante should have all my sighs; her heart, which esteems you, is solid and sincere; and this choice, which is more agreeable, would be more for your interest. Alcestes. It’s true, my reason daily tells me so. But reason is not what governs love. Philintes. I’m terribly afraid for this love of yours, and the hopes you have may— Title: SCENE II Orontes (to alcestes). I was informed below that Éliante and Célimène were both gone abroad to make some purchase. But as they told me you were here, I came up to assure you, with a sincere heart, that I have conceived an incredible esteem for you; and that for a long time, this esteem has given me an ardent desire to be in the number of your friends. Yes, my heart loves to do justice to merit, and I ardently long that the bond of friendship might unite us. I think that a friend who is zealous, and of my quality too, is certainly not to be rejected. (During this time alcestes appears in a musing posture, and seems not to know that orontes speaks to him.) Orontes. ’Tis to you (to alcestes), if you please, that this discourse is addressed. Alcestes. To me, sir? Orontes. To you. Is it offensive to you? Alcestes. Not at all, but my surprise is very great, and I did not expect the honour I receive. Orontes. The esteem I hold you in ought not by any means to surprise you; you may claim it from the whole universe. Alcestes. Sir— Orontes. The whole kingdom contains nothing which is not below the shining merit the world discovers in you. Alcestes. Sir— Orontes. Yes, for my part, I hold you preferable to everything that I perceive the most considerable in it. Alcestes. Sir— Orontes. May the sky crush me if I lie; and, to confirm you in my sentiments, permit me with an open heart to embrace you, and to demand a place in your friendship. Your hand, if you please. You promise me your friendship? Alcestes. Sir— Orontes. What! do ye refuse? Alcestes. Sir, ’tis too much honour you design me. But friendship demands something more of mystery, and ’tis certainly to profane the name to think of bringing it upon all occasions. This union must spring from judgment and choice; before we engage ourselves, ’tis necessary we should be better acquainted, and we may possibly be of such complexions that we may both of us heartily repent of the bargain. Orontes. Egad, this is talking upon the affair like a man of sense, and I esteem you still the more for it; let us leave it to time then to form so delightful a union. But in the meanwhile, I make you an entire offer of myself; if I am to ask any favour for you at court, the world knows I make some figure near the king; I have his ear, and faith, he always treats me with all the freedom in the world. In short, I am in all respects absolutely yours. And as you are a man of bright parts, I come, by way of commencing this agreeable union, to show you a song which I made a little while ago, and to know whether ’tis fit I should expose it to the public. Alcestes. Sir, I am a very unfit person to decide the affair; be so good to excuse me. Orontes. Why so? Alcestes. I have the weakness of being a little more sincere in this case than I should be. Orontes. The very thing I ask; I should have room for complaint if, exposing myself to you that you might speak without dissimulation, you should deceive me, and hide anything from me in disguise. Alcestes. Since you are pleased to have it so, sir, I am very willing. Orontes. A song—’Tis a song. Hope—’Tis a lady who had flattered my passion with some hope. Hope—These are none of your grand pompous verses, but your slighter verses, soft, tender, and languishing. Alcestes.