continue..
sleep from pain.” “Yes, no matter what it comes from; only you will never get over it in this way, and will keep on tormenting us.” Praskovia Feodorovna’s settled conviction in regard to his ailment—and she impressed it on every one, and on Ivan Ilyitch himself—was that he was to blame for it, and that his whole illness was a new affliction which he was causing his wife. Ivan Ilyitch felt that this was involuntary on her part, but it was not on that account any easier for him to bear it. In court Ivan Ilyitch noticed, or thought he noticed, the same strange behavior toward him; now it seemed to him that he was regarded as a man who was soon to give up his place; again, his friends would suddenly begin to rally him about his low spirits, as if this horrible, strange, and unheard-of something that was breeding in him and ceaselessly sucking up his vitality, and irresistibly dragging him away, were a pleasant subject for raillery! Schwartz especially irritated him with his jocularity, his lively ways, and his comme-il-faut-ness, reminding Ivan Ilyitch of himself as he had been ten years before. Friends came in to have a game of cards. They sat down, they dealt, new cards were shuffled, diamonds were thrown on diamonds—seven of them. His partner said, “No trumps,” and held up two diamonds. What more could be desired? It ought to have been a gay proud moment,—a clean sweep. And suddenly Ivan Ilyitch was conscious of that living pain, of that taste in his mouth, and it seemed to him barbarous that he should be able thus to rejoice in this hand. He looked at Mikhaïl Mikhaïlovitch, his partner, as he rapped the table with his big red hand, and courteously and condescendingly refrained from gathering up the tricks, but pushed them over to Ivan Ilyitch that he might have the pleasure of counting them, without inconveniencing himself, without putting his hand out. “What! does he think that I am so weak that I can’t put my hand out?” said Ivan Ilyitch to himself; then he forgot what were trumps; trumped his partner’s trick, and lost the sweep by three points. And what was more terrible than all was that he saw how Mikhaïl Mikhaïlovitch suffers, and yet to him it was a matter of indifference. And it was terrible to think why it was a matter of indifference to him. All could see that it was hard for him, and they said to him: “We can stop playing if you are tired. You rest awhile.” Rest? No, he was not tired at all; they would finish the rubber. All were gloomy and taciturn. Ivan Ilyitch felt that he was the cause of their gloominess, and he could not enliven it. They had supper, and then went home; and Ivan Ilyitch was left alone, with the consciousness that his life is poisoned for him, and that he is poisoning the lives of others, and that this poison is not growing weaker, but is always working its way deeper and deeper into his being. And with this consciousness, sometimes also with physical pain, sometimes with terror, he would have to go to bed, and frequently not sleep from anguish the greater part of the night. And in the morning he would have to get up again and dress and go to court and speak, write, and, unless he went out to ride, stay at home for those twenty-four hours, each one of which was a torture. And he had to live thus on the edge of destruction—alone, without anyone to understand him and pity him. Thus passed one month and two. Before New Year’s his brother-in-law came to their city, and stopped at their house. Praskovia Feodorovna had gone out shopping. Ivan Ilyitch was in court. When he came home, and went into his library, he found his brother-in-law there, a healthy, sanguine man, engaged in opening his trunk. He raised his head as he heard Ivan Ilyitch’s steps, and looked at him a moment in silence. This look revealed all to Ivan Ilyitch. His brother-in-law opened his mouth to exclaim at him, and refrained. This motion confirmed everything. “What? Have I changed?” “Yes…there is a change.” And whenever afterward Ivan Ilyitch tried to bring the conversation round to the subject of his external appearance, his brother-in-law avoided it. Praskovia Feodorovna came in and his brother-in-law went to her room. Ivan Ilyitch locked the door, and began to look at himself in the glass, first front face, then his profile. He took his portrait painted with his wife, and compared it with what he saw in the mirror. The change was portentous. Then he bared his arm to the elbow, looked at it, pulled down his sleeve, sat down on the otomanka, and it became darker than night. “It must not…it must not be!” said he to himself; jumped up, went to the table, unfolded a document, began to read it, but could not. He opened the door, went out into the hall. The drawing-room door was shut. He tiptoed up to it, and began to listen. “No, you exaggerate,” Praskovia Feodorovna was saying. “How do I exaggerate? Isn’t it plain to you? He’s a dead man. Look at his eyes, no light in them…. But what’s the matter with him?” “No one knows. Nikolayef”—that was another doctor—“says one thing, but I don’t know about it. Leshchititsky”—that was the famous doctor—“says the opposite.” Ivan Ilyitch turned away, went to his room, lay down, and began to think: “Kidney—a floating kidney!” He recalled all that the doctors had told him—how it was torn away, and how it was loose. And by an effort of his imagination he endeavored to catch this kidney, to stop it, to fasten it. “It is such a small thing to do,” it seemed to him. “No; I will make another visit to Piotr Ivanovitch.” This was the friend whose friend was a doctor. He rang, ordered the horse to be harnessed, and got ready to go out. “Where are you going, Jean?” asked his wife, with a peculiarly gloomy and unusually gentle expression. This unusually gentle expression angered him. He looked at her grimly. “I have got to go to Piotr Ivanovitch’s.” He went to the friend whose friend was a doctor. They went together to this doctor’s. He found him and had a long talk with him. As he examined the anatomical and physiological details of what, according to the doctor, was taking place in him, he comprehended it perfectly. There was one more trifle—the least bit of a trifle in the vermiform appendix. All that could be put to rights. Strengthen the force of one organ, weaken the activity of another—assimilation ensues, and all is set to rights. He was a little late to dinner. He ate heartily, he talked gaily, but for a long time he was not able to make up his mind to go to work. At last he went to his library, and immediately sat down to his labors. He read his documents, and labored over them; but he did not get rid of the consciousness that he had before him an important, private duty, which he must carry out to a conclusion. When he had finished with his documents, he remembered that this private duty was the thought about the vermiform appendix. But he did not give in to it; he went to the drawing room to tea. They had callers; there was conversation, there was playing on the pianoforte, and singing; the examining magistrate, the desirable match for their daughter, was there. Ivan Ilyitch spent the evening, as Praskovia Feodorovna observed, more cheerfully than usual; but he did not for a moment forget that he had before him those important thoughts about the vermiform appendix. At eleven o’clock he bade his friends good night, and retired to his own room. Since his illness began, he had slept alone in a little room off the library. He went to it, undressed, and took a romance of Zola’s; but he did not read it; he thought. And in his imagination the longed-for cure of the vermiform appendix took place. Assimilation, secretion, were stimulated; regulated activity was established. “Yes, it is just exactly so,” said he to himself. “It is only necessary to help nature.” He remembered his medicine, got up, took it, lay on his back, waiting for the medicine to have its beneficent effect, and gradually ease his pain. “Only take it regularly, and avoid unhealthy influences; even now I feel a little better, considerably better.” He began to punch his side; it was not painful to the touch. “No, I don’t feel it…already I feel considerably better.” He blew out the candle, and lay on his side…. “The vermiform appendix becomes regulated, is absorbed…” And suddenly he began to feel the old, well-known, dull, lingering pain, stubborn, silent, serious; in his mouth