continue..
mutual distances at any instant, as well as the velocities with which these distances vary at this same instant, will depend only on the state of those bodies and their mutual distances at the initial instant, and the velocities with which these distances vary at this initial instant, but they will not depend either upon the absolute initial position of the system, or upon its absolute orientation, or upon the velocities with which this absolute position and orientation varied at the initial instant. Unhappily the law thus enunciated is not in accord with experiments, at least as they are ordinarily interpreted. Suppose a man be transported to a planet whose heavens were always covered with a thick curtain of clouds, so that he could never see the other stars; on that planet he would live as if it were isolated in space. Yet this man could become aware that it turned, either by measuring its oblateness (done ordinarily by the aid of astronomic observations, but capable of being done by purely geodetic means), or by repeating the experiment of Foucault’s pendulum. The absolute rotation of this planet could therefore be made evident. That is a fact which shocks the philosopher, but which the physicist is compelled to accept. We know that from this fact Newton inferred the existence of absolute space; I myself am quite unable to adopt this view…. For the moment it is not my intention to enter upon this difficulty. Therefore I must resign myself, in the enunciation of the law of relativity, to including velocities of every kind among the data which define the state of the bodies. However that may be, this difficulty is the same for Euclid’s geometry as for Lobachevskf’s; I therefore need not trouble myself with it, and have only mentioned it incidentally. What is important is the conclusion: experiment cannot decide between Euclid and Lobachevski. To sum up, whichever way we look at it, it is impossible to discover in geometric empiricism a rational meaning. 6. Experiments only teach us the relations of bodies to one another; none of them bears or can bear on the relations of bodies with space, or on the mutual relations of different parts of space. “Yes,” you reply, “a single experiment is insufficient, because it gives me only a single equation with several unknowns; but when I shall have made enough experiments I shall have equations enough to calculate all my unknowns.” To know the height of the mainmast does not suffice for calculating the age of the captain. When you have measured every bit of wood in the ship you will have many equations, but you will know his age no better. All your measurements bearing only on your bits of wood can reveal to you nothing except concerning these bits of wood. Just so your experiments, however numerous they may be, bearing only on the relations of bodies to one another, will reveal to us nothing about the mutual relations of the various parts of space. 7. Will you say that if the experiments bear on the bodies, they bear at least upon the geometric properties of the bodies? But, first, what do you understand by geometric properties of the bodies? I assume that it is a question of the relations of the bodies with space; these properties are therefore inaccessible to experiments which bear only on the relations of the bodies to one another. This alone would suffice to show that there can be no question of these properties. Still let us begin by coming to an understanding about the sense of the phrase: geometric properties of bodies. When I say a body is composed of several parts, I assume that I do not enunciate therein a geometric property, and this would remain true even if I agreed to give the improper name of points to the smallest parts I consider. When I say that such a part of such a body is in contact with such a part of such another body, I enunciate a proposition which concerns the mutual relations of these two bodies and not their relations with space. I suppose you will grant me these are not geometric properties; at least I am sure you will grant me these properties are independent of all knowledge of metric geometry. This presupposed, I imagine that we have a solid body formed of eight slender iron rods, OA, OB, OC, OD, OE, OF, OG, OH, united at one of their extremities O. Let us besides have a second solid body, for example a bit of wood, to be marked with three little flecks of ink which I shall call α, β, γ. I further suppose it ascertained that αβγ may be brought into contact with AGO (I mean α with A, and at the same time β with G and γ with O), then that we may bring successively into contact αβγ with BGO, CGO, DGO, EGO, FGO, then with AHO, BHO, CHO, DHO, EHO, FHO, then αγ successively with AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, FA. These are determinations we may make without having in advance any notion about form or about the metric properties of space. They in nowise bear on the “geometric properties of bodies.” And these determinations will not be possible if the bodies experimented upon move in accordance with a group having the same structure as the Lobachevskian group (I mean according to the same laws as solid bodies in Lobachevski’s geometry). They suffice therefore to prove that these bodies move in accordance with the Euclidean group, or at least that they do not move according to the Lobachevskian group. That they are compatible with the Euclidean group is easy to see. For they could be made if the body αβγ was a rigid solid of our ordinary geometry presenting the form of a right-angled triangle, and if the points ABCDEFGH were the summits of a polyhedron formed of two regular hexagonal pyramids of our ordinary geometry, having for common base ABCDEF and for apices the one G and the other H. Suppose now that in place of the preceding determination it is observed that as above αβγ can be successively applied to AGO, BGO, CGO, DGO, EGO, AHO, BHO, CHO, DHO, EHO, FHO, then that αβ (and no longer αγ) can be successively applied to AB, BC, CD, DE, EF and FA. These are determinations which could be made if non-Euclidean geometry were true, if the bodies αβγ and OABCDEFGH were rigid solids, and if the first were a right-angled triangle and the second a double regular hexagonal pyramid of suitable dimensions. Therefore these new determinations are not possible if the bodies move according to the Euclidean group; but they become so if it be supposed that the bodies move according to the Lobachevskian group. They would suffice, therefore (if one made them), to prove that the bodies in question do not move according to the Euclidean group. Thus, without making any hypothesis about form, about the nature of space, about the relations of bodies to space, and without attributing to bodies any geometric property, I have made observations which have enabled me to show in one case that the bodies experimented upon move according to a group whose structure is Euclidean, in the other case that they move according to a group whose structure is Lobachevskian. And one may not say that the first aggregate of determinations would constitute an experiment proving that space is Euclidean, and the second an experiment proving that space is non-Euclidean. In fact one could imagine (I say imagine) bodies moving so as to render possible the second series of determinations. And the proof is that the first mechanician met could construct such bodies if he cared to take the pains and make the outlay. You will not conclude from that, however, that space is non-Euclidean. Nay, since the ordinary solid bodies would continue to exist when the mechanician had constructed the strange bodies of which I have just spoken, it would be necessary to conclude that space is at the same time Euclidean and non-Euclidean. Suppose, for example, that we have a great sphere of radius R and that the temperature decreases from the center to the surface of this sphere according to the law of which I have spoken in describing the non-Euclidean world. We might have bodies whose expansion would be negligible and which would act like ordinary rigid solids; and, on the other hand, bodies very dilatable and which would act like non-Euclidean solids. We might have two double pyramids OABCDEFGH and O′A′B′C′D′E′F′G′H′ and two triangles αβγ and α′β′γ′. The first double pyramid might be rectilinear and the second curvilinear; the triangle αβγ might be made of inexpansible matter and the other of a very dilatable matter. It would then be possible to make the first observations with the double pyramid OAH and the triangle αβγ, and the second with the double pyramid O′A′H′ and the