continue..
not raise its value. It is wrong to acquire things in the belief that they are good, to be in constant fear of losing them in the belief that they are good, and yet when we hold them to disregard and despise them as if they were nothing worth. Rather should we use them with pleasure and satisfaction, so that we may easily bear their loss, if that should befall. The majority of men, Arcesilaus remarks, feel obliged to scrutinize other peoples’ poems and paintings and statues very carefully, examining each part with mind and eye; but their own lives, which have many features for agreeable contemplation, they overlook. Always they look to other men’s reputations and fortunes, as adulterers look to other men’s wives, and themselves and their own qualities they despise. Here is another practice conducive to contentment. It is best, of course, to look to oneself and one’s own state, but if not we should contemplate inferiors, and not, as the majority do, compare ourselves with our superiors. Prisoners, for example, regard those released as happy, and these, in turn, freemen, and freemen citizens, and citizens, in turn, the rich, the rich satraps, satraps kings, and kings gods, all but coveting thunder and lightning. Always desiderating what is beyond them, they are never pleased with what they have. Poem ```The wealth of gold-abounding Croesus Is no concern to me; Ambition offers no temptation; From envy I am free. The gods’ affairs I do not question; No monarch would I be. I am content, where’er I’m sent With mediocrity.``` “A Thasian’s sentiment,” it will be objected. But there are Chians and Galatians and Bithynians who are dissatisfied with the reputation or power they have got among their countrymen and wail because they cannot sport the patrician badge, and if they can, because they are not praetors, and if they are, because they are not consuls, and if they are, because they were nominated second instead of first. What is this but scraping up excuses for ingratitude to Fortune and penalizing and tormenting oneself? But the sensible man whose thinking is wholesome knows that the sun looks down on untold myriads of men, “As many as enjoy the produce of broad earth” [Simonides], does not sit downhearted and humiliated because there are some more famous and richer than he, but reflects that his life is better and more respectable than millions of others and goes his way singing hallelujahs to his tutelary deity and to his life. At Olympia you cannot win by choosing your competitors, but the rules of life allow you to vaunt your superiority over many others, to be enviable rather than envious—unless you set yourself up to rival a Briareus or a Hercules. So whenever you admire a man carried in a sedan chair as being superior, stoop to look at the carriers too. And whenever you call Xerxes blessed, as the Hellespontine did when he saw him crossing the bridge, look at the poor devils digging at Athos under the knout and having their ears and noses cut off because the waves broke the bridge down, and reflect on what is in their mind: they call your life and your state blessed. When Socrates heard one of his friends complain that the city was dear—“Chian wine a mina, purple cloth three minae, a dram of honey five drachmas”—he took hold of him and brought him to the grain vendors. “Half a peck for an obol—the city is cheap”; then to the oil men—“A quart for two coppers”; then to the clothing merchants—“A gown for ten drachmas—the city is cheap.” So when we hear anyone remark that our situation is mean and irksome because we are not consuls or governors, we can say, “Our situation is brilliant, our life enviable: we are not beggars, or porters, or flatterers.” But folly has habituated us to live with a view to others rather than to ourselves, and our nature holds so much envy and malice that our pleasure in our own advantages is not so great as our distress at others’; it behooves you, therefore, to look not merely at the brilliance and fame of those you envy and admire but to roll back the spangled curtain of their reputation, as it were, strip the veneer off and get inside, and behold the many troublesome and disagreeable aspects of their being. The famous Pittacus, whose courage and wisdom and justice were so widely acclaimed, was entertaining guests when his wife came storming in and overturned the table. His guests were embarrassed, but Pittacus said: “Each of us has his trouble; a man with mine is to be congratulated.” This man the market place counts happy Is a heap of misery when he opens his door: His wife is emperor and general and always embattled. He has much to vex him, I have naught. Many such vexations, which wealth and fame and royalty entail, are imperceptible to the commonality, for they are benighted in a fog. For his extrinsic pomp, his arms and horses and warrior host, Agamemnon is felicitated as “Atreides, favored by Fortune’s weird”; but from within the voice of his own suffering bears witness against this empty glory: “Zeus son of Cronus has bound me fast in heavy doom,” and I envy you, old man; I envy any man who has passed through life Without danger, without fame, without glory. Such reflections as these will serve to skim off that carping at Fortune which humbles and forfeits our own assets by admiration of our neighbor’s. A very considerable handicap to contentment is our failure to temper our ambition, as a skipper reefs his sails, to the energy available. Our hopes reach out for too much, and when we fail we blame Fortune and doom instead of our own folly. It is not bad luck which prevents a man from practicing archery with a plow or hunting rabbits with an ox, it is not a malignant deity which keeps him from catching stag or boar with fishing tackle; to attempt the impossible is stupid and silly. The culprit is self-love, which impels men to crave primacy and victory in everything and to an irrepressible desire to lay hands on everything. Men not only claim the right to be at once rich and learned and strong and good fellows and agreeable companions and friends of kings and governors of a city, but they are dejected if they do not also own blue-ribbon dogs and horses and quails and cocks. The elder Dionysius was not content with being the greatest dictator of his time, but because he could not rhyme better than the poet Philoxenus or down Plato in dialectic, he flew into a rage and in his exasperation threw Philoxenus into the stone quarries and sent Plato to Aegina to be sold into slavery. Not so Alexander; when the champion Crison seemed to slacken speed on purpose in a race with him he got very angry. When Achilles says, “Of the bronze-armed Achaeans none is my peer,” he subjoins, “In battle; in council others are better.” When Megabyzus the Persian visited Apelles’ studio and undertook to babble about art, Apelles shut his mouth with the remark: “So long as you held your peace you seemed to be somebody because of your gold and purple, but now the apprentices grinding the colors are laughing at your foolishness.” When some people hear that the Stoics call their sage not only wise and just and brave but also an orator, poet, general, millionaire, king, they think it funny, and yet they themselves claim all these graces and are irked if they do not get them. But even among the gods each has his own province; one is styled “of war,” another “of prophecy,” another “of gain,” and Zeus assigns Aphrodite to weddings and the bridal chamber “for that she hath no share in deeds of war.” It is in the nature of certain pursuits that they cannot exist side by side but must be in conflict with one another. For example, practicing declamations and studying mathematics require leisure and freedom from distraction, whereas success as a public official or courtier is impossible without preoccupation and activity. Again, “wine and a meat diet render the body stout and robust, but the soul weak.” Constant care and vigilance in money matters augments wealth, but a detached disdain of wealth is an effective viaticum for the road to philosophy. Not everything is for everyone; one must heed the Pythian injunction to know himself and then occupy himself as Nature intended and not override her by compulsive emulation of one mode of life after another. [As Pindar says:] The horse is for the chariot, the ox for the plow, The dolphin swiftly skims the sea at the vessel’s side; If a man would slay a boar he must find a rugged hound. Only a lunatic is impatient and vexed because he is not at