continue..
possibility of hope to be dispelled. During the last period of this solitude through which he was passing, as he lay with his face turned to the back of the divan—a solitude amid a populous city, and amid his numerous circle of friends and family, a solitude deeper than which could not be found anywhere, either in the depths of the sea, or in the earth—during the last period of this terrible solitude, Ivan Ilyitch lived only by imagination in the past. One after another, the pictures of his past life arose before him. They always began with the time nearest to the present, and went back to the very remotest—to his childhood, and there they rested. If Ivan Ilyitch remembered the stewed prunes which they had given him to eat that very day, then he remembered the raw, puckery French prunes of his childhood, their peculiar taste, and the abundant flow of saliva caused by the stone. And in connection with these recollections of taste started a whole series of recollections of that time—his nurse, his brother, his toys. “I must not think about these things; it is too painful,” said Ivan Ilyitch to himself. And again he transported himself to the present—the button on the back of the divan, and the wrinkles of the morocco. “Morocco is costly, not durable. There was a quarrel about it. But there was some other morocco, and some other quarrel, when we tore father’s portfolio and got punished, and mamma brought us some tarts.” And again his thoughts reverted to childhood; and again it was painful to Ivan Ilyitch, and he tried to avoid it, and think of something else. And again, together with this current of recollections, there passed through his mind another current of recollections about the progress and rise of his disease. Here, also, according as he went back, there was more and more of life. There was more, also, of excellence in life, and more of life itself. And the two were confounded. “Just as this agony goes from worse to worse, so also all my life has gone from worse to worse,” he thought. “One shining point, there back in the distance, at the beginning of life; and then all growing blacker and blacker, swifter and swifter, in inverse proportion to the square of the distance from death,” thought Ivan Ilyitch. And the comparison of a stone falling with accelerating rapidity occurred to his mind. Life, a series of increasing tortures, always speeding swifter and swifter to the end—the most horrible torture. “I am falling.” He shuddered, he tossed, he wished to resist it. But he already knew that it was impossible to resist; and again, with eyes weary of looking, but still not able to resist looking at what was before him, he stared at the back of the divan, and waited, waited for this frightful fall, shock, and destruction. “It is impossible to resist,” he said to himself. “But can I not know the wherefore of it? Even that is impossible. It might be explained by saying that I had not lived as I ought. But it is impossible to acknowledge that,” he said to himself, recollecting all the legality, the uprightness, the propriety of his life. “It is impossible to admit that,” he said to himself, with a smile on his lips, as if someone were to see that smile of his, and be deceived by it. “No explanation! torture, death…why?” Thus passed two weeks. In these weeks, there occurred an event desired by Ivan Ilyitch and his wife. Petrishchef made a formal proposal. This took place in the evening. On the next day, Praskovia Feodorovna went to her husband, meditating in what way to explain to him Feodor Petrovitch’s proposition; but that very same night, a change for the worse had taken place in Ivan Ilyitch’s condition. Praskovia Feodorovna found him on the same divan, but in a new position. He was lying on his back; he was groaning, and looking straight up with a fixed stare. She began to speak about medicines. He turned his eyes on her. She did not finish saying what she had begun, so great was the hatred against her expressed in that look. “For Christ’s sake, let me die in peace!” said he. She was about to go out; but just at this instant the daughter came in, and came near to wish him good morning. He looked at his daughter as he had looked at his wife, and, in reply to her questions about his health, told her dryly that he would quickly relieve them all of his presence. Neither mother nor daughter said anything more; but they sat for a few moments longer, and then went out. “What are we to blame for?” said Liza to her mother. “As if we had made him so! I am sorry for papa, but why should he torment us?” At the usual time the doctor came. Ivan Ilyitch answered “yes,” “no,” not taking his angry eyes from him; and at last he said: “Now see here, you know that you don’t help any, so leave me!” “We can appease your sufferings,” said the doctor. “You cannot even do that; leave me!” The doctor went into the drawing room, and advised Praskovia Feodorovna that it was very serious, and that there was only one means—opium—of appeasing his sufferings, which must be terrible. The doctor said that his physical sufferings were terrible, and this was true; but more terrible than his physical sufferings were his moral sufferings, and in this was his chief torment. His moral sufferings consisted in the fact that that very night, as he looked at Gerasim’s sleepy, good-natured face, with its high cheekbones, it had suddenly come into his head: “But how is it if in reality my whole life, my conscious life, has been wrong?” It came into his head that what had shortly before presented itself to him as an absolute impossibility—that he had not lived his life as he ought—might be true. It came into his head that the scarcely recognizable desires to struggle against what men highest in position considered good—desires scarcely recognizable, which he had immediately banished—might be true, and all the rest might be wrong. And his service, and his course of life, and his family, and these interests of society and office—all this might be wrong. He endeavored to defend all this before himself. And suddenly he realized all the weakness of what he was defending. And there was nothing to defend. “But if this is so,” he said to himself, “and I am departing from life with the consciousness that I have wasted all that was given me, and that it is impossible to rectify it, what then?” He lay flat on his back, and began entirely anew to examine his whole life. When in the morning he saw the lackey, then his wife, then his daughter, then the doctor, each one of their motions, each one of their words, confirmed for him the terrible truth which had been disclosed to him that night. He saw in them himself, all that for which he had lived; and he saw clearly that all this was wrong, all this was a terrible, monstrous lie, concealing both life and death. This consciousness increased his physical sufferings, added tenfold to them. He groaned and tossed, and threw off the clothes. It seemed to him that they choked him, and loaded him down. And that was why he detested them. They gave him a great dose of opium; he became unconscious, but at dinnertime the same thing began again. He drove them from him, and threw himself from place to place. His wife came to him, and said: “Jean, darling, do this for me (for me!). It cannot do any harm, and sometimes it helps. Why, it is a mere nothing. And often well people try it.” He opened his eyes wide. “What? Take the sacrament? Why? It’s not necessary. But, however…” She burst into tears. “Will you, my dear? I will get our priest. He is so sweet!” “Excellent! very good,” he continued. When the priest came, and confessed him, he became calmer, felt, as it were, an alleviation of his doubts, and consequently of his suffering; and there came a moment of hope. He again began to think about the blind intestine and the possibility of curing it. He took the sacrament with tears in his eyes. When they put him to bed after the sacrament, he felt comfortable for the moment, and once more hope of life appeared. He began to think of the operation which they had proposed. “I want to live, to live,” he said to himself. His wife came to congratulate him. She said the customary words, and added: “You feel better, don’t you?” Without looking at her, he said: “Yes.” Her hope, her temperament, the expression of her face, the sound of her voice, all said