continue..
I cannot think it culpable, if, while my understanding severely condemns his vices, my heart suggests some pity for his distresses. Sir Peter. Well, well, pity him as much as you please, but give your heart and hand to a worthier object. Maria. Never to his brother! Sir Peter. Go, perverse and obstinate! But take care, madam; you have never yet known what the authority of a guardian is—don’t compel me to inform you of it. Maria. I can only say, you shall not have just reason. ’Tis true, by my father’s will, I am for a short period bound to regard you as his substitute, but must cease to think you so, when you would compel me to be miserable. (Exit maria.) Sir Peter. Was ever man so crossed as I am! everything conspiring to fret me! I had not been involved in matrimony a fortnight, before her father, a hale and hearty man, died—on purpose, I believe, for the pleasure of plaguing me with the care of his daughter. But here comes my helpmate! She appears in great good humour. How happy I should be if I could tease her into loving me, though but a little! Enter lady teazle. Lady Teazle. Lud! Sir Peter, I hope you haven’t been quarrelling with Maria—it isn’t using me well to be ill humoured when I am not by. Sir Peter. Ah, Lady Teazle, you might have the power to make me good humoured at all times. Lady Teazle. I am sure I wish I had—for I want you to be in charming sweet temper at this moment. Do be good humoured now, and let me have two hundred pounds, will you? Sir Peter. Two hundred pounds! what, an’t I to be in a good humour without paying for it! But speak to me thus, and i’faith there’s nothing I could refuse you. You shall have it; but seal me a bond for the repayment. Lady Teazle. O, no—there—my note of hand will do as well. Sir Peter (kissing her hand). And you shall no longer reproach me with not giving you an independent settlement—I mean shortly to surprise you; but shall we always live thus, hey? Lady Teazle. If you please. I’m sure I don’t care how soon we leave off quarrelling, provided you’ll own you were tired first. Sir Peter. Well—then let our future contest be, who shall be most obliging. Lady Teazle. I assure you, Sir Peter, good nature becomes you. You look now as you did before we were married!—when you used to walk with me under the elms, and tell me stories of what a gallant you were in your youth, and chuck me under the chin, you would, and ask me if I thought I could love an old fellow, who would deny me nothing—didn’t you? Sir Peter. Yes, yes, and you were as kind and attentive. Lady Teazle. Aye, so I was, and would always take your part, when my acquaintance used to abuse you, and turn you into ridicule. Sir Peter. Indeed! Lady Teazle. Aye, and when my cousin Sophy has called you a stiff, peevish old bachelor, and laughed at me for thinking of marrying one who might be my father, I have always defended you—and said, I didn’t think you so ugly by any means, and that I dared say you’d make a very good sort of a husband. Sir Peter. And you prophesied right—and we shall certainly now be the happiest couple— Lady Teazle. And never differ again! Sir Peter. No, never!—though at the same time, indeed, my dear Lady Teazle, you must watch your temper very narrowly; for in all our little quarrels, my dear, if you recollect, my love, you always began first. Lady Teazle. I beg your pardon, my dear Sir Peter: indeed, you always gave the provocation. Sir Peter. Now, see, my angel! take care—contradicting isn’t the way to keep friends. Lady Teazle. Then, don’t you begin it, my love! Sir Peter. There, now! you—you are going on—you don’t perceive, my life, that you are just doing the very thing which you know always makes me angry. Lady Teazle. Nay, you know if you will be angry without any reason— Sir Peter. There now! you want to quarrel again. Lady Teazle. No, I am sure I don’t—but, if you will be so peevish— Sir Peter. There now! who begins first? Lady Teazle. Why, you, to be sure. I said nothing—but there’s no bearing your temper. Sir Peter. No, no, madam, the fault’s in your own temper. Lady Teazle. Aye, you are just what my cousin Sophy said you would be. Sir Peter. Your cousin Sophy is a forward, impertinent gipsy. Lady Teazle. You are a great bear, I’m sure, to abuse my relations. Sir Peter. Now may all the plagues of marriage be doubled on me, if ever I try to be friends with you any more! Lady Teazle. So much the better. Sir Peter. No, no, madam; ’tis evident you never cared a pin for me, and I was a madman to marry you—a pert, rural coquette, that had refused half the honest squires in the neighbourhood! Lady Teazle. And I am sure I was a fool to marry you—an old dangling bachelor, who was single at fifty, only because he never could meet with any one who would have him. Sir Peter. Aye, aye, madam; but you were pleased enough to listen to me—you never had such an offer before. Lady Teazle. No! didn’t I refuse Sir Twivy Tarrier, who everybody said would have been a better match—for his estate is just as good as yours—and he has broke his neck since we have been married. Sir Peter. I have done with you, madam! You are an unfeeling, ungrateful—but there’s an end of everything. I believe you capable of anything that’s bad. Yes, madam, I now believe the reports relative to you and Charles, madam—yes, madam, you and Charles—are not without grounds— Lady Teazle. Take care, Sir Peter! you had better not insinuate any such thing! I’ll not be suspected without cause, I promise you. Sir Peter. Very well, madam! very well! a separate maintenance as soon as you please. Yes, madam, or a divorce! I’ll make an example of myself for the benefit of all old bachelors. Let us separate, madam. Lady Teazle. Agreed! agreed! And now, my dear Sir Peter, we are of a mind once more, we may be the happiest couple, and never differ again, you know: ha! ha! Well, you are going to be in a passion, I see, and I shall only interrupt you—so, bye-bye! (Exit.) Sir Peter. Plagues and tortures! can’t I make her angry neither? Oh, I am the miserablest fellow! But I’ll not bear her presuming to keep her temper—no! she may break my heart, but she shan’t keep her temper. (Exit.) Title: SCENE II—CHARLES’Shouse Enter trip, moses, and sir oliver surface. Trip. Here, Master Moses! if you’ll stay a moment, I’ll try whether—what’s the gentleman’s name? Sir Oliver. Mr. Moses, what is my name? (Aside.) Moses. Mr. Premium. Trip. Premium—very well. (Exit trip, taking snuff.) Sir Oliver. To judge by the servants, one wouldn’t believe the master was ruined. But what!—sure, this was my brother’s house? Moses. Yes, sir; Mr. Charles bought it of Mr. Joseph, with the furniture, pictures, etc., just as the old gentleman left it—Sir Peter thought it a great piece of extravagance in him. Sir Oliver. In my mind, the other’s economy in selling it to him was more reprehensible by half. Re-enter trip. Trip. My master says you must wait, gentlemen; he has company, and can’t speak with you yet. Sir Oliver. If he knew who it was wanted to see him, perhaps he wouldn’t have sent such a message? Trip. Yes, yes, sir; he knows you are here—I didn’t forget little Premium—no, no, no. Sir Oliver. Very well—and I pray, sir, what may be your name? Trip. Trip, sir—my name is Trip, at your service. Sir Oliver. Well, then, Mr. Trip, you have a pleasant sort of a place here, I guess. Trip. Why, yes—here are three or four of us pass our time agreeably enough; but then our wages are sometimes a little in arrear—and not very great either—but fifty pounds a year, and find our own bags and bouquets. Sir Oliver (aside). Bags and bouquets! halters and bastinadoes! Trip. But à propos, Moses, have you been able to get me that little bill discounted? Sir Oliver (aside). Wants to raise money, too!—mercy on me! Has his distresses, I warrant, like a lord and affects creditors and duns. Moses. ’Twas not to be done, indeed, Mr. Trip. (Gives the note.) Trip. Good lack, you surprise me! My friend Brush has indorsed it, and I thought when he put his mark on the back of a bill ’twas as good as cash. Moses. No, ’twouldn’t do. Trip. A small sum—but twenty pounds. Hark’ee, Moses, do you think you