continue..
mousehole.) It opens; and the strange lady steps in . She is tall and extraordi narily graceful, with a delicately intelligent, apprehensive, question ing face: perception in the brow, sensitiveness in the nostrils, char acter in the chin: all keen, refined, and original. She is very feminine, but by no means weak: the lithe tender figure is hung on a strong frame: the hands and feet, neck and shoulders, are useful vigorous members, of full size in proportion to her stature, which perceptibly exceeds that of napoleon and the innkeeper, and leaves her at no disadvantage with the lieutenant . Only, her elegance and radiant charm keep the secret of her size and strength. She is not, judging by her dress, an admirer of the latest fashions of the Directory; or perhaps she uses up her old dresses for travelling. At all events she wears no jacket with extravagant lapels, no Graeco-Tallien sham chiton, nothing, indeed, that the Princesse de Lamballe might not have worn. Her dress of flowered silk is long-waisted, with a Wat teau pleat behind, but with the panniers reduced to mere rudiments, as she is too tall for them. It is cut low in the neck, where it is eked out by a creamy fichu. She is fair, with golden-brown hair and grey eyes. She enters with the self-possession of a woman accustomed to the privileges of rank and beauty. The innkeeper, who has excellent natural manners, is highly appreciative of her. napoleon is smitten self-conscious . His colour deepens: he becomes stiffer and less at ease than before. She is advancing in an infinitely well-bred man ner to pay her respects to him when the lieutenant pounces on her and seizes her right wrist . As she recognizes him, she becomes deadly pale. There is no mistaking her expression: a revelation of some fa tal error, utterly unexpected, has suddenly appalled her in the midst of tranquillity, security, and victory. The next moment a wave of an gry colour rushes up from beneath the creamy fichu and drowns her whole face. One can see that she is blushing all over her body. Even the lieutenant , ordinarily incapable of observation, can see a thing when it is painted red for him . Interpreting the blush as the involuntary confession of black deceit confronted with its victim, he addresses her in a loud crow of retributive triumph. Lieutenant. So I’ve got you, my lad. So you’ve disguised yourself, have you? (In a voice of thunder, releasing her wrist) Take off that skirt. Giuseppe (remonstrating). Oh, Lieutenant! Lady (affrighted, but highly indignant at his having dared to touch her). Gentlemen: I appeal to you. (To napoleon) You, sir, are an officer: a general. You will protect me, will you not? Lieutenant. Never you mind him, General. Leave me to deal with him. Napoleon. With him! With whom, sir? Why do you treat this lady in such a fashion? Lieutenant. Lady! He’s a man! the man I showed my confidence in. (Raising his sword) Here, you— Lady (running behind napoleon and in her agitation clasping to her breast the arm which he extends before her as a fortification). Oh, thank you, General. Keep him away. Napoleon. Nonsense, sir. This is certainly a lady (she suddenly drops his arm and blushes again); and you are under arrest. Put down your sword, sir, instantly. Lieutenant. General: I tell you he’s an Austrian spy. He passed himself off on me as one of General Masséna’s staff this afternoon; and now he’s passing himself off on you as a woman. Am I to believe my own eyes or not? Lady. General: it must be my brother. He is on General Masséna’s staff. He is very like me. Lieutenant (his mind giving way). Do you mean to say that you’re not your brother, but your sister? the sister who was so like me? who had my beautiful blue eyes? It’s a lie: your eyes are not like mine: they’re exactly like your own. Napoleon (with contained exasperation). Lieutenant: will you obey my orders and leave the room, since you are convinced at last that this is no gentleman? Lieutenant. Gentleman! I should think not. No gentleman would have abused my confid— Napoleon (out of all patience). That will do, sir: do you hear? Will you leave the room? I order you to leave the room. Lady. Oh pray let me go instead. Napoleon (dryly). Excuse me, madam. With all possible respect for your brother, I do not yet understand what an officer on General Masséna’s staff wants with my letters. I have some questions to put to you. Giuseppe (discreetly). Come, Lieutenant. (He opens the door.) Lieutenant. I’m off. General: take warning by me: be on your guard against the better side of your nature. (To the lady) Madam: my apologies. I thought you were the same person, only of the opposite sex; and that naturally misled me. Lady (recovering her good humour). It was not your fault, was it? I’m so glad you’re not angry with me any longer, Lieutenant. (She offers her hand.) Lieutenant (bending gallantly to kiss it). Oh, madam, not the lea— (Checking himself and looking at it) You have your brother’s hand. And the same sort of ring! Lady (sweetly). We are twins. Lieutenant. That accounts for it. (He kisses her hand.) A thousand pardons. I didn’t mind about the despatches at all: that’s more the General’s affair than mine: it was the abuse of my confidence through the better side of my nature. (Taking his cap, gloves, and whip from the table and going) You’ll excuse my leaving you, General, I hope. Very sorry, I’m sure. (He talks himself out of the room. giuseppe follows him and shuts the door.) Napoleon (looking after them with concentrated irritation). Idiot! The strange lady smiles sympathetically . He comes frowning down the room between the table and the fireplace, all his awkwardness gone now that he is alone with her. Lady. How can I thank you, General, for your protection? Napoleon (turning on her suddenly). My despatches: come! (He puts out his hand for them.) Lady. General! (She involuntarily puts her hands on her fichu as if to protect something there.) Napoleon. You tricked that blockhead out of them. You disguised yourself as a man. I want my despatches. They are there in the bosom of your dress, under your hands. Lady (quickly removing her hands). Oh, how unkindly you are speaking to me! (She takes her handkerchief from her fichu) You frighten me. (She touches her eyes as if to wipe away a tear.) Napoleon. I see you don’t know me, madam, or you would save yourself the trouble of pretending to cry. Lady (producing an effect of smiling through her tears). Yes, I do know you. You are the famous General Buonaparte. (She gives the name a marked Italian pronunciation: Bwawna-parr-te.) Napoleon (angrily, with the French pronunciation). Bonaparte, madam, Bonaparte. The papers, if you please. Lady. But I assure you—(He snatches the handkerchief rudely.) General! (Indignantly.) Napoleon (taking the other handkerchief from his breast). You lent one of your handkerchiefs to my lieutenant when you robbed him. (He looks at the two handkerchiefs.) They match one another. (He smells them.) The same scent. (He flings them down on the table.) I am waiting for my despatches. I shall take them, if necessary, with as little ceremony as I took the handkerchief. Lady (in dignified reproof). General: do you threaten women? Napoleon (bluntly). Yes. Lady (disconcerted, trying to gain time). But I don’t understand. I— Napoleon. You understand perfectly. You came here because your Austrian employers calculated that I was six leagues away. I am always to be found where my enemies don’t expect me. You have walked into the lion’s den. Come! you are a brave woman. Be a sensible one: I have no time to waste. The papers. (He advances a step omi nously.) Lady (breaking down in the childish rage of impotence, and throwing herself in tears on the chair left beside the table by the lieutenant). I brave! How little you know! I have spent the day in an agony of fear. I have a pain here from the tightening of my heart at every suspicious look, every threatening movement. Do you think everyone is as brave as you? Oh, why will not you brave people do the brave things? Why do you leave them to us, who have no courage at all? I’m not brave: I shrink from violence: danger makes me miserable. Napoleon (interested). Then why have you thrust yourself into danger? Lady. Because there is no other way: I can trust nobody else. And now it is all useless: all because of you, who have no fear because you have no heart, no feeling, no—(She breaks off, and throws herself on her knees.) Ah, General, let me go: let me go without asking any questions. You shall have your despatches and letters: