continue..
million billion. Contrary to popular belief, this is a larger number of words than is spoken at the average afternoon bridge. A great deal of the veneration for the authority of the printed word would vanish if one were to calculate the number of words which have been printed since the Gutenberg Bible appeared. It is a number somewhat larger than 10. A recent popular historical novel alone accounts for the printing of several hundred billion words. The largest number seen in finance (though new records are in the making) represents the amount of money in circulation in Germany at the peak of the inflation. It was less than a googol—merely 496, 585, 346, 000, 000, 000, 000. A distinguished economist vouches for the accuracy of this figure. The number of marks in circulation was very nearly equal to the number of grains of sand on Coney Island beach. The number of atoms of oxygen in the average thimble is a good deal larger. It would be represented by perhaps 1000000000000000000000000000. The number of electrons, in size exceedingly smaller than the atoms, is much more enormous. The number of electrons which pass through the filament of an ordinary fifty-watt electric lamp in a minute equals the number of drops of water that flow over Niagara Falls in a century. One may also calculate the number of electrons, not only in the average room, but over the whole earth, and out through the stars, the Milky Way, and all the nebulae. The reason for giving all these examples of very large numbers is to emphasize the fact that no matter how large the collection to be counted, a finite number will do the trick. We will have occasion later on to speak of infinite collections, but those encountered in nature, though sometimes very large, are all definitely finite. A celebrated scientist recently stated in all seriousness that he believed that the number of pores (through which leaves breathe) of all the leaves, of all the trees in all the world, would certainly be infinite. Needless to say, he was not a mathematician. The number of electrons in a single leaf is much bigger than the number of pores of all the leaves of all the trees of all the world. And still the number of all the electrons in the entire universe can be found by means of the physics of Einstein. It is a good deal less than a googol—perhaps one with seventy-nine zeros, 10, as estimated by Eddington. Words of wisdom are spoken by children at least as often as by scientists. The name “googol” was invented by a child (Dr. Kasner’s nine-year-old nephew) who was asked to think up a name for a very big number, namely, 1 with a hundred zeros after it. He was very certain that this number was not infinite, and therefore equally certain that it had to have a name. At the same time that he suggested “googol” he gave a name for a still larger number: “Googolplex.” A googolplex is much larger than a googol, but is still finite, as the inventor of the name was quick to point out. It was first suggested that a googolplex should be 1, followed by writing zeros until you got tired. This is a description of what would happen if one actually tried to write a googolplex, but different people get tired at different times and it would never do to have Camera a better mathematician than Dr. Einstein, simply because he had more endurance. The googolplex then, is a specific finite number, with so many zeros after the 1 that the number of zeros is a googol. A googolplex is much bigger than a googol, much bigger even than a googol times a googol. A googol times a googol would be 1 with 200 zeros, whereas a googolplex is 1 with a googol of zeros. You will get some idea of the size of this very large but finite number from the fact that there would not be enough room to write it, if you went to the farthest star, touring all the nebulae and putting down zeros every inch of the way. One might not believe that such a large number would ever really have any application; but one who felt that way would not be a mathematician. A number as large as the googolplex might be of real use in problems of combination. This would be the type of problem in which it might come up scientifically: Consider this book which is made up of carbon and nitrogen and of other elements. The answer to the question, “How many atoms are there in this book?” would certainly be a finite number, even less than a googol. Now imagine that the book is held suspended by a string, the end of which you are holding. How long will it be necessary to wait before the book will jump up into your hand? Could it conceivably ever happen? One answer might be “No, it will never happen without some external force causing it to do so.” But that is not correct. The right answer is that it will almost certainly happen sometime in less than a googolplex of years—perhaps tomorrow. The explanation of this answer can be found in physical chemistry, statistical mechanics, the kinetic theory of gases, and the theory of probability. We cannot dispose of all these subjects in a few lines, but we will try. Molecules are always moving. Absolute rest of molecules would mean absolute zero degrees of temperature, and absolute zero degrees of temperature is not only nonexistent, but impossible to obtain. All the molecules of the surrounding air bombard the book. At present the bombardment from above and below is nearly the same and gravity keeps the book down. It is necessary to wait for the favorable moment when there happens to be an enormous number of molecules bombarding the book from below and very few from above. Then gravity will be overcome and the book will rise. It would be somewhat like the effect known in physics as the Brownian movement, which describes the behavior of small particles in a liquid as they dance about under the impact of molecules. It would be analogous to the Brownian movement on a vast scale. But the probability that this will happen in the near future or, for that matter, on any specific occasion that we might mention, is between and . To be reasonably sure that the book will rise, we should have to wait between a googol and a googolplex of years. When working with electrons or with problems of combination like the one of the book we need larger numbers than are usually talked about. It is for that reason that names like googol and googolplex, though they may appear to be mere jokes, have a real value. The names help to fix in our minds the fact that we are still dealing with finite numbers. To repeat, a googol is 10; a googolplex is 10 to the googol power, which may be written . We have seen that the number of years that one would have to wait to see the miracle of the rising book would be less than a googolplex. In that number of years the earth may well have become a frozen planet as dead as the moon, or perhaps splintered to a number of meteors and comets. The real miracle is not that the book will rise, but that with the aid of mathematics, we can project ourselves into the future and predict with accuracy when it will probably rise, i.e., some time between today and the year googolplex. We have mentioned quite a few new names in mathematics—new names for old and new ideas. There is one more new name which it is proper to mention in conclusion. Watson Davis, the popular science reporter, has given us the name “mathescope.” With the aid of the magnificent new microscopes and telescopes, man, midway between the stars and the atoms, has come a little closer to both. The mathescope is not a physical instrument; it is a purely intellectual instrument, the ever-increasing insight which mathematics gives into the fairyland which lies beyond intuition and beyond imagination. Mathematicians, unlike philosophers, say nothing about ultimate truth, but patiently, like the makers of the great microscopes, and the great telescopes, they grind their lenses. In this book, we shall let you see through the newer and greater lenses which the mathematicians have ground. Be prepared for strange sights through the mathescope!