Work: The School for Scandal Field: school for scandal Author: Richard Sheridan Title: ACT I Title: SCENE 1—LADY SNEERWELL’Shouse lady sneerwell at the dressing-table. snake drinking chocolate. Lady Sneerwell. The paragraphs, you say, Mr. Snake, were all inserted? Snake. They were, madam, and as I copied them myself in a feigned hand, there can be so suspicion whence they came. Lady Sneerwell. Did you circulate the reports of Lady Brittle’s intrigue with Captain Boastall? Snake. That is in as fine a train as your ladyship could wish—in the common course of things, I think it must reach Mrs. Clackit’s ears within four-and-twenty hours; and then, you know, the business is as good as done. Lady Sneerwell. Why, truly, Mrs. Clackit has a very pretty talent, and a great deal of industry. Snake. True, madam, and has been tolerably successful in her day: to my knowledge, she has been the cause of six matches being broken off, and three sons being disinherited, of four forced elopements, as many close confinements, nine separate maintenances, and two divorces; nay, I have more than once traced her causing a tête-à-tête in the Town and Country Magazine, when the parties perhaps had never seen each other’s faces before in the course of their lives. Lady Sneerwell. She certainly has talents, but her manner is gross. Snake. ’Tis very true—she generally designs well, has a free tongue, and a bold invention; but her colouring is too dark, and her outline often extravagant. She wants that delicacy of hint, and mellowness of sneer, which distinguish your ladyship’s scandal. Lady Sneerwell. Ah! you are partial, Snake. Snake. Not in the least; everybody allows that Lady Sneerwell can do more with a word or a look than many can with the most laboured detail, even when they happen to have a little truth on their side to support it. Lady Sneerwell. Yes, my dear Snake; and I am no hypocrite to deny the satisfaction I reap from the success of my efforts. Wounded myself, in the early part of my life, by the envenomed tongue of slander, I confess I have since known no pleasure equal to the reducing others to the level of my own injured reputation. Snake. Nothing can be more natural. But, Lady Sneerwell, there is one affair in which you have lately employed me, wherein, I confess, I am at a loss to guess your motives. Lady Sneerwell. I conceive you mean with respect to my neighbour, Sir Peter Teazle, and his family? Snake. I do; here are two young men, to whom Sir Peter has acted as a kind of guardian since their father’s death; the elder possessing the most amiable character, and universally well spoken of; the youngest, the most dissipated and extravagant young fellow in the kingdom, without friends or character—the former an avowed admirer of your ladyship, and apparently your favourite; the latter attached to Maria, Sir Peter’s ward, and confessedly beloved by her. Now, on the face of these circumstances, it is utterly unaccountable to me, why you, the widow of a city knight, with a good jointure, should not close with the passion of a man of such character and expectations as Mr. Surface; and more so why you should be so uncommonly earnest to destroy the mutual attachment subsisting between his brother Charles and Maria. Lady Sneerwell. Then, at once to unravel this mystery, I must inform you that love has no share whatever in the intercourse between Mr. Surface and me. Snake. No! Lady Sneerwell. His real attachment is to Maria, or her fortune; but, finding in his brother a favoured rival, he has been obliged to mask his pretensions, and profit by my assistance. Snake. Yet still I am more puzzled why you should interest yourself in his success. Lady Sneerwell. Heav’ns! how dull you are! Cannot you surmise the weakness which I hitherto, through shame, have concealed even from you? Must I confess that Charles—that libertine, that extravagant, that bankrupt in fortune and reputation—that he it is for whom I am thus anxious and malicious, and to gain whom I would sacrifice everything? Snake. Now, indeed, your conduct appears consistent; but how came you and Mr. Surface so confidential? Lady Sneerwell. For our mutual interest. I have found him out a long time since—I know him to be artful, selfish, and malicious—in short, a sentimental knave. Snake. Yet, Sir Peter vows he has not his equal in England—and, above all, he praises him as a man of sentiment. Lady Sneerwell. True; and with the assistance of his sentiment and hypocrisy he has brought him [Sir Peter] entirely into his interest with regard to Maria. Enter servant. Servant. Mr. Surface. Lady Sneerwell. Show him up. (Exit servant.) He generally calls about this time. I don’t wonder at people’s giving him to me for a lover. Enter joseph surface. Joseph Surface. My dear Lady Sneerwell, how do you do to-day? Mr. Snake, your most obedient. Lady Sneerwell. Snake has just been arraigning me on our mutual attachment, but I have informed him of our real views; you know how useful he has been to us; and, believe me, the confidence is not ill placed. Joseph Surface. Madam, it is impossible for me to suspect a man of Mr. Snake’s sensibility and discernment. Lady Sneerwell. Well, well, no compliments now; but tell me when you saw your mistress, Maria—or, what is more material to me, your brother. Joseph Surface. I have not seen either since I left you; but I can inform you that they never meet. Some of your stories have taken a good effect on Maria. Lady Sneerwell. Ah, my dear Snake! the merit of this belongs to you. But do your brother’s distresses increase? Joseph Surface. Every hour; I am told he has had another execution in the house yesterday; in short, his dissipation and extravagance exceed anything I ever heard of. Lady Sneerwell. Poor Charles! Joseph Surface. True, madam; notwithstanding his vices, one can’t help feeling for him. Aye, poor Charles! I’m sure I wish it was in my power to be of any essential service to him. For the man who does not share in the distresses of a brother, even though merited by his own misconduct, deserves— Lady Sneerwell. O lud! you are going to be moral, and forget that you are among friends. Joseph Surface. Egad, that’s true! I’ll keep that sentiment till I see Sir Peter. However, it is certainly a charity to rescue Maria from such a libertine, who, if he is to be reclaimed, can be so only by a person of your ladyship’s superior accomplishments and understanding. Snake. I believe, Lady Sneerwell, here’s company coming—I’ll go and copy the letter I mentioned to you.—Mr. Surface, your most obedient. (Exit snake.) Joseph Surface. Sir, your very devoted.—Lady Sneerwell, I am very sorry you have put any further confidence in that fellow. Lady Sneerwell. Why so? Joseph Surface. I have lately detected him in frequent conference with old Rowley, who was formerly my father’s steward, and has never, you know, been a friend of mine. Lady Sneerwell. And do you think he would betray us? Joseph Surface. Nothing more likely: take my word for’t, Lady Sneerwell, that fellow hasn’t virtue enough to be faithful even to his own villainy.—Hah! Maria! Enter maria. Lady Sneerwell. Maria, my dear, how do you do? What’s the matter? Maria. Oh! there is that disagreeable lover of mine, Sir Benjamin Backbite, has just called at my guardian’s, with his odious uncle, Crabtree; so I slipped out, and run hither to avoid them. Lady Sneerwell. Is that all? Joseph Surface. If my brother Charles had been of the party, ma’am, perhaps you would not have been so much alarmed. Lady Sneerwell. Nay, now you are severe; for I dare swear the truth of the matter is, Maria heard you were here; but, my dear, what has Sir Benjamin done, that you should avoid him so? Maria. Oh, he has done nothing—but ’tis for what he has said—his conversation is a perpetual libel on all his acquaintance. Joseph Surface. Aye, and the worst of it is, there is no advantage in not knowing him; for he’ll abuse a stranger just as soon as his best friend—and his uncle’s as bad. Lady Sneerwell. Nay, but we should make allowance; Sir Benjamin is a wit and a poet. Maria. For my part, I own, madam, wit loses its respect with me, when I see it in company with malice. —What do you think, Mr. Surface? Joseph Surface. Certainly, madam; to smile at the jest which plants a thorn in another’s breast is to become a principal in the mischief. Lady Sneerwell. Pshaw! there’s no possibility of being witty without a little ill nature: the malice of a good thing is the barb that makes it stick.—What’s your opinion, Mr. Surface? Joseph Surface. To be sure, madam, that conversation, where the spirit of raillery is suppressed, will ever appear