continue..
back. Per Bacco, I can’t help admiring you. I wish I could lie like that. It would save me a great deal of trouble. Lady (wringing her hands). Oh, how I wish I really had told you some lie! You would have believed me then. The truth is the one thing nobody will believe. Napoleon (with coarse familiarity, treating her as if she were a vivan dière). Capital! Capital! (He puts his hands behind him on the table, and lifts himself on to it, sitting with his arms akimbo and his legs wide apart) Come: I am a true Corsican in my love for stories. But I could tell them better than you if I set my mind to it. Next time you are asked why a letter compromising a wife should not be sent to her husband, answer simply that the husband wouldn’t read it. Do you suppose, you goose, that a man wants to be compelled by public opinion to make a scene, to fight a duel, to break up his household, to injure his career by a scandal, when he can avoid it all by taking care not to know? Lady (revolted). Suppose that packet contained a letter about your own wife? Napoleon (offended, coming off the table). You are impertinent, madam. Lady (humbly). I beg your pardon. Caesar’s wife is above suspicion. Napoleon (with a deliberate assumption of superiority). You have committed an indiscretion. I pardon you. In future, do not permit yourself to introduce real persons in your romances. Lady (politely ignoring a speech which is to her only a breach of good manners). General: there really is a woman’s letter there. (Pointing to the packet) Give it to me. Napoleon (with brute conciseness). Why? Lady. She is an old friend: we were at school together. She has written to me imploring me to prevent the letter falling into your hands. Napoleon. Why has it been sent to me? Lady. Because it compromises the director Barras. Napoleon (frowning, evidently startled). Barras! (Haughtily) Take care, madam. The director Barras is my attached personal friend. Lady (nodding placidly). Yes. You became friends through your wife. Napoleon. Again! Have I not forbidden you to speak of my wife? (She keeps looking curiously at him, taking no account of the rebuke. More and more irritated, he drops his haughty manner, of which he is himself somewhat impatient, and says suspiciously, lowering his voice) Who is this woman with whom you sympathize so deeply? Lady. Oh, General! How could I tell you that? Napoleon (ill-humouredly, beginning to walk about again in angry per plexity). Ay, ay: stand by one another. You are all the same, you women. Lady (indignantly). We are not all the same, any more than you are. Do you think that if I loved another man, I should pretend to go on loving my husband, or be afraid to tell him or all the world? But this woman is not made that way. She governs men by cheating them; and they like it, and let her govern them. (She turns her back to him in disdain.) Napoleon (not attending to her). Barras? Barras? (Very threateningly, his face darkening) Take care. Take care: do you hear? You may go too far. Lady (innocently turning her face to him). What’s the matter? Napoleon. What are you hinting at? Who is this woman? Lady (meeting his angry searching gaze with tranquil indifference as she sits looking up at him). A vain, silly, extravagant creature, with a very able and ambitious husband who knows her through and through: knows that she has lied to him about her age, her income, her social position, about everything that silly women lie about: knows that she is incapable of fidelity to any principle or any person; and yet cannot help loving her—cannot help his man’s instinct to make use of her for his own advancement with Barras. Napoleon (in a stealthy coldly furious whisper). This is your revenge, you she cat, for having had to give me the letters. Lady. Nonsense! Or do you mean that you are that sort of man? Napoleon (exasperated, clasps his hands behind him, his fingers twitch ing, and says, as he walks irritably away from her to the fireplace). This woman will drive me out of my senses. (To her) Begone. Lady (seated immovably). Not without that letter. Napoleon. Begone, I tell you. (Walking from the fireplace to the vine yard and back to the table) You shall have no letter. I don’t like you. You’re a detestable woman, and as ugly as Satan. I don’t choose to be pestered by strange women. Be off. (He turns his back on her. In quiet amusement, she leans her cheek on her hand and laughs at him. He turns again, angrily mocking her.) Ha! ha! ha! What are you laughing at? Lady. At you, General. I have often seen persons of your sex getting into a pet and behaving like children; but I never saw a really great man do it before. Napoleon (brutally, flinging the words in her face). Psha! Flattery! Flattery! Coarse, impudent flattery! Lady (springing up with a bright flush in her cheeks). Oh, you are too bad. Keep your letters. Read the story of your own dishonour in them; and much good may they do you. Good-bye. (She goes in dignantly towards the inner door.) Napoleon. My own—! Stop. Come back. Come back, I order you. (She proudly disregards his savagely peremptory tone and continues on her way to the door. He rushes at her; seizes her by the arm; and drags her back.) Now, what do you mean? Explain. Explain. I tell you, or—(Threatening her. She looks at him with unflinching defi ance.) Rrrr! you obstinate devil, you. (Throwing her arm away) Why can’t you answer a civil question? Lady (deeply offended by his violence). Why do you ask me? You have the explanation. Napoleon. Where? Lady (pointing to the letters on the table). There. You have only to read it. He snatches the packet up; hesitates; looks at her suspiciously; and throws it down again. Napoleon. You seem to have forgotten your solicitude for the honour of your old friend. Lady. I do not think she runs any risk now. She does not quite understand her husband. Napoleon. I am to read the letter, then? (He stretches out his hand as if to take up the packet again, with his eye on her.) Lady. I do not see how you can very well avoid doing so now. (He in stantly withdraws his hand.) Oh, don’t be afraid. You will find many interesting things in it. Napoleon. For instance? Lady. For instance, a duel with Barras, a domestic scene, a broken household, a public scandal, a checked career, all sorts of things. Napoleon. Hm! (He looks at her; takes up the packet and looks at it, pursing his lips and balancing it in his hands; looks at her again; passes the packet into his left hand and puts it behind his back, raising his right to scratch the back of his head as he turns and goes up to the edge of the vineyard, where he stands for a moment looking out into the vines, deep in thought. The lady watches him in silence, somewhat slightingly. Suddenly he turns and comes back again, full of force and decision.) I grant your request, madam. Your courage and resolution deserve to succeed. Take the letters for which you have fought so well; and remember henceforth that you found the vile vulgar Corsican adventurer as generous to the vanquished after the battle as he was resolute in the face of the enemy before it. (He offers her the packet.) Lady (without taking it, looking hard at him). What are you at now, I wonder? (He dashes the packet furiously to the floor.) Aha! I’ve spoilt that attitude, I think. (She makes him a pretty mocking curtsey.) Napoleon (snatching it up again). Will you take the letters and begone (advancing and thrusting them upon her)? Lady (escaping around the table). No: I don’t want your letters. Napoleon. Ten minutes ago, nothing else would satisfy you. Lady (keeping the table carefully between them). Ten minutes ago you had not insulted me beyond all bearing. Napoleon. I—(swallowing his spleen) I apologize. Lady (coolly). Thanks. (With forced politeness he offers her the packet across the table. She retreats a step out of its reach and says) But don’t you want to know whether the Austrians are at Mantua or Peschiera? Napoleon. I have already told you that I can conquer my enemies without the aid of spies, madam. Lady. And the letter? don’t you want to read that? Napoleon. You have said that it is not addressed to me. I am not in the habit of reading other people’s letters. (He again offers the packet.) Lady. In that case there can be no objection to your keeping it. All I wanted was