Work: Beyond the Googol Field: beyond the googol Author: Edward Kasner and James R. Newman — Heraclitus If you do not expect the unexpected, you will not find it; for it is hard to be sought out, and difficult. Mathematics may well be a science of austere logical propositions in precise canonical form, but in its countless applications it serves as a tool and a language, the language of description, of number and size. It describes with economy and elegance the elliptic orbits of the planets as readily as the shape and dimensions of this page or a cornfield. The whirling dance of the electron can be seen by no one; the most powerful telescopes can reveal only a meager bit of the distant stars and nebulae and the cold far corners of space. But with the aid of mathematics and the imagination the very small, the very large—all things may be brought within man’s domain. To count is to talk the language of number. To count to a googol, or to count to ten is part of the same process; the googol is simply harder to pronounce. The essential thing to realize is that the googol and ten are kin, like the giant stars and the electron. Arithmetic—this counting language—makes the whole world kin, both in space and in time. To grasp the meaning and importance of mathematics, to appreciate its beauty and its value, arithmetic must first be understood, for mostly, since its beginning, mathematics has been arithmetic in simple or elaborate attire. Arithmetic has been the queen and the handmaiden of the sciences from the days of the astrologers of Chaldea and the high priests of Egypt to the present days of relativity, quanta, and the adding machine. Historians may dispute the meaning of ancient papyri, theologians may wrangle over the exegesis of Scripture, philosophers may debate over Pythagorean doctrine, but all will concede that the numbers in the papyri, in the Scriptures and in the writings of Pythagoras are the same as the numbers of today. As arithmetic, mathematics has helped man to cast horoscopes, to make calendars, to predict the risings of the Nile, to measure fields and the height of the Pyramids, to measure the speed of a stone as it fell from a tower in Pisa, the speed of an apple as it fell from a tree in Woolsthorpe, to weigh the stars and the atoms, to mark the passage of time, to find the curvature of space. And although mathematics is also the calculus, the theory of probability, the matrix algebra, the science of the infinite, it is still the art of counting. Everyone who will read this book can count, and yet, what is counting? The dictionary definitions are about as helpful as Johnson’s definition of a net: “A series of reticulated interstices.” Learning to compare is learning to count. Numbers come much later; they are an artificiality, an abstraction. Counting, matching, comparing are almost as indigenous to man as his fingers. Without the faculty of comparing, and without his fingers, it is unlikely that he would have arrived at numbers. One who knows nothing of the formal processes of counting is still able to compare two classes of objects, to determine which is the greater, which the less. Without knowing anything about numbers, one may ascertain whether two classes have the same number of elements; for example, barring prior mishaps, it is easy to show that we have the same number of fingers on both hands by simply matching finger with finger on each hand. To describe the process of matching, which underlies counting, mathematicians use a picturesque name. They call it putting classes into a “one-to-one reciprocal correspondence” with each other. Indeed, that is all there is to the art of counting as practiced by primitive peoples, by us, or by Einstein. A few examples may serve to make this clear. In a monogamous country it is unnecessary to count both the husbands and the wives in order to ascertain the number of married people. If allowances are made for the few gay Lotharios who do not conform to either custom or statute, it is sufficient to count either the husbands or the wives. There are just as many in one class as in the other. The correspondence between the two classes is one-to-one. There are more useful illustrations. Many people are gathered in a large hall where seats are to be provided. The question is, are there enough chairs to go around? It would be quite a job to count both the people and the chairs, and in this case unnecessary. In kindergarten children play a game called “Going to Jerusalem”; in a room full of children and chairs there is always one less chair than the number of children. At a signal, each child runs for a chair. The child left standing is “out.” A chair is removed and the game continues. Here is the solution to our problem. It is only necessary to ask everyone in the hall to be seated. If everyone sits down and no chairs are left vacant, it is evident that there are as many chairs as people. In other words, without actually knowing the number of chairs or people, one does know that the number is the same. The two classes—chairs and people—have been shown to be equal in number by a one-to-one correspondence. To each person corresponds a chair, to each chair, a person. In counting any class of objects, it is this method alone which is employed. One class contains the things to be counted; the other class is always at hand. It is the class of integers, or “natural numbers,” which for convenience we regard as being given in serial order: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.… Matching in one-to-one correspondence the elements of the first class with the integers, we experience a common, but none the less wonderful phenomenon—the last integer necessary to complete the pairings denotes how many elements there are. In clarifying the idea of counting, we made the unwarranted assumption that the concept of number was understood by everyone. The number concept may seem intuitively clear, but a precise definition is required. While the definition may seem worse than the disease, it is not as difficult as appears at first glance. Read it carefully and you will find that it is both explicit and economical. Given a class C containing certain elements, it is possible to find other classes, such that the elements of each may be matched one to one with the elements of C. (Each of these classes is thus called “equivalent to C.”) All such classes, including C, whatever the character of their elements, share one property in common: all of them have the same cardinal number, which is called the cardinal number of the class C. The cardinal number of the class C is thus seen to be the symbol representing the set of all classes that can be put into one-to-one correspondence with C. For example, the number 5 is simply the name, or symbol, attached to the set of all the classes, each of which can be put into one-to-one correspondence with the fingers of one hand. Hereafter we may refer without ambiguity to the number of elements in a class as the cardinal number of that class or, briefly, as “its cardinality.” The question, “How many letters are there in the word mathematics?” is the same as the question, “What is the cardinality of the class whose elements are the letters in the word mathematics?” Employing the method of one-to-one correspondence, the following graphic device answers the question, and illustrates the method: It must now be evident that this method is neither strange nor esoteric; it was not invented by mathematicians to make something natural and easy seem unnatural and hard. It is the method employed when we count our change or our chickens; it is the proper method for counting any class, no matter how large, from ten to a googolplex—and beyond. Soon we shall speak of the “beyond” when we turn to classes which are not finite. Indeed, we shall try to measure our measuring class—the integers. One-to-one correspondence should, therefore, be thoroughly understood, for an amazing revelation awaits us: Infinite classes can also be counted, and by the very same means. But before we try to count them, let us practice on some very big numbers—big, but not infinite. “Googol” is already in our vocabulary: It is a big number—one, with a hundred zeros after it. Even bigger is the googolplex: 1 with a googol zeros after it. Most numbers encountered in the description of nature are much smaller, though a few are larger. Enormous numbers occur frequently in modern science. Sir Arthur Eddington claims that there are, not approximately, but exactly 136·2 protons, and an equal number of electrons, in the universe. Though not easy to visualize, this number, as a symbol