Work: New Names for Old Field: new names for old Author: Edward Kasner and James R. Newman Poem ```— Chaucer For out of olde feldes, as men seith, Cometh al this newe corn fro yeer to yere; And out of olde bokes, in good feith, Cometh al this newe science that men lere.``` Every once in a while there is house cleaning in mathematics. Some old names are discarded, some dusted off and refurbished; new theories, new additions to the household are assigned a place and name. So what our title really means is new words in mathematics; not new names, but new words, new terms which have in part come to represent new concepts and a reappraisal of old ones in more or less recent mathematics. There are surely plenty of words already in mathematics as well as in other subjects. Indeed, there are so many words that it is even easier than it used to be to speak a great deal and say nothing. It is mostly through words strung together like beads in a necklace that half the population of the world has been induced to believe mad things and to sanctify mad deeds. Frank Vizetelly, the great lexicographer, estimated that there are 800,000 words in use in the English language. But mathematicians, generally quite modest, are not satisfied with these 800,000; let us give them a few more. We can get along without new names until, as we advance in science, we acquire new ideas and new forms. A peculiar thing about mathematics is that it does not use so many long and hard names as the other sciences. Besides, it is more conservative than the other sciences in that it clings tenaciously to old words. The terms used by Euclid in his Elements are current in geometry today. But an Ionian physicist would find the terminology of modern physics, to put it colloquially, pure Greek. In chemistry, substances no more complicated than sugar, starch, or alcohol have names like these: Methylpropenylenedihydroxycinnamenylacrylic acid, or, 0-anhydrosulfaminobenzoine, or, protocatechuicaldehydemethylene. It would be inconvenient if we had to use such terms in everyday conversation. Who could imagine even the aristocrat of science at the breakfast table asking, “Please pass the O-anhydrosulfaminobenzoic acid,” when all he wanted was sugar for his coffee? Biology also has some tantalizing tongue twisters. The purpose of these long words is not to frighten the exoteric, but to describe with scientific curtness what the literary man would take half a page to express. In mathematics there are many easy words like “group,” “family,” “ring,” “simple curve,” “limit,” etc. But these ordinary words are sometimes given a very peculiar and technical meaning. In fact, here is a booby-prize definition of mathematics: Mathematics is the science which uses easy words for hard ideas. In this it differs from any other science. There are 500,000 known species of insects and every one has a long Latin name. In mathematics we are more modest. We talk about “fields,” “groups,” “families,” “spaces,” although much more meaning is attached to these words than ordinary conversation implies. As its use becomes more and more technical, nobody can guess the mathematical meaning of a word any more than one could guess that a “drug store” is a place where they sell ice-cream sodas and umbrellas. No one could guess the meaning of the word “group” as it is used in mathematics. Yet it is so important that whole courses are given on the theory of “groups,” and hundreds of books are written about it. Because mathematicians get along with common words, many amusing ambiguities arise. For instance, the word “function” probably expresses the most important idea in the whole history of mathematics. Yet, most people hearing it would think of a “function” as meaning an evening social affair, while others, less socially minded, would think of their livers. The word “function” has at least a dozen meanings, but few people suspect the mathematical one. The mathematical meaning (which we shall elaborate upon later) is expressed most simply by a table. Such a table gives the relation between two variable quantities when the value of one variable quantity is determined by the value of the other. Thus, one variable quantity may express the years from 1800 to 1938, and the other, the number of men in the United States wearing handle-bar mustaches; or one variable may express in decibels the amount of noise made by a political speaker, and the other, the blood pressure units of his listeners. You could probably never guess the meaning of the word “ring” as it has been used in mathematics. It was introduced into the newer algebra within the last twenty years. The theory of rings is much more recent than the theory of groups. It is now found in most of the new books on algebra, and has nothing to do with either matrimony or bells. Other ordinary words used in mathematics in a peculiar sense are “domain,” “integration,” “differentiation.” The uninitiated would not be able to guess what they represent; only mathematicians would know about them. The word “transcendental” in mathematics has not the meaning it has in philosophy. A mathematician would say: The number π, equal to 3.14159…, is transcendental, because it is not the root of any algebraic equation with integer coefficients. Transcendental is a very exalted name for a small number, but it was coined when it was thought that transcendental numbers were as rare as quintuplets. The work of Georg Cantor in the realm of the infinite has since proved that of all the numbers in mathematics, the transcendental ones are the most common, or, to use the word in a slightly different sense, the least transcendental. We shall talk of this later when we speak of another famous transcendental number, e, the base of the natural logarithms. Immanuel Kant’s “transcendental epistemology” is what most educated people might think of when the word transcendental is used, but in that sense it has nothing to do with mathematics. Again, take the word “evolution,” used in mathematics to denote the process most of us learned in elementary school, and promptly forgot, of extracting square roots, cube roots, etc. Spencer, in his philosophy, defines evolution as “an integration of matter, and a dissipation of motion from an indefinite, incoherent homogeneity to a definite, coherent heterogeneity,” etc. But that, fortunately, has nothing to do with mathematical evolution either. Even in Tennessee, one may extract square roots without running afoul of the law. As we see, mathematics uses simple words for complicated ideas. An example of a simple word used in a complicated way is the word “simple.” “Simple curve” and “simple group” represent important ideas in higher mathematics. The above is not a simple curve. A simple curve is a closed curve which does not cross itself and may look like the figure on page 124. There are many important theorems about such figures that make the word worth while. Later, we are going to talk about a queer kind of mathematics called “rubber-sheet geometry,” and will have much more to say about simple curves and nonsimple ones. A French mathematician, Jordan, gave the fundamental theorem: every simple curve has one inside and one outside. That is, every simple curve divides the plane into two regions, one inside the curve, and one outside. There are some groups in mathematics that are “simple” groups. The definition of “simple group” is really so hard that it cannot be given here. If we wanted to get a clear idea of what a simple group was, we should probably have to spend a long time looking into a great many books, and then, without an extensive mathematical background, we should probably miss the point. First of all, we should have to define the concept “group.” Then we should have to give a definition of subgroups, and then of self-conjugate subgroups, and then we should be able to tell what a simple group is. A simple group is simply a group without any self-conjugate subgroups—simple, is it not? Mathematics is often erroneously referred to as the science of common sense. Actually, it may transcend common sense and go beyond either imagination or intuition. It has become a very strange and perhaps frightening subject from the ordinary point of view, but anyone who penetrates into it will find a veritable fairyland, a fairyland which is strange, but makes sense, if not common sense. From the ordinary point of view mathematics deals with strange things. We shall show you that occasionally it does deal with strange things, but mostly it deals with familiar things in a strange way. If you look at yourself in an ordinary mirror, regardless of your physical attributes, you may find yourself amusing, but not strange; a subway ride to Coney Island, and a glance at yourself in one of the distorting mirrors will convince you that from another point of view you may be strange as well as