continue..
time, and am come to implore your assistance. Sganarel (feeling his pulse). A very bad pulse this. Leander. I am not sick, Sir; nor is it for that I come to you. Sganarel. If you are not sick, why the deuce did you not say so? Leander. No. To inform you of the affair in two words, my name is Leander, and I’m in love with Lucinda, whom you come to visit. But as all manner of access to her is blocked up from me by the ill temper of her father, I run the hazard of entreating you to endeavour to serve me in my amour, and to give me an opportunity of executing a stratagem I’ve invented to be able to speak a word or two with her, on which my life and happiness absolutely depend. Sganarel. Who d’ye take me for? What? Dare you apply to me to serve you in your amour, and to debase the dignity of a physician by employments of this kind? Leander. Don’t make a noise, Sir! Sganarel (making him retreat). I will do it; you are an impertinent fellow. Leander. Oh! Sir, softly. Sganarel. An inconsiderate jackanapes. Leander. Pray now. Sganarel. I’ll teach you that I’m not such a man, and that ’tis an extreme piece of insolence— Leander (taking out a purse). Sir. Sganarel (taking the purse). To think of employing me—I don’t speak as to you, for you are an honest man, and I should rejoice to do you service. But there are certain impertinent creatures in the world who take people for what they are not; and this, I must own to you, puts me in a passion. Leander. I ask your pardon, Sir, for the liberty that— Sganarel. You jest. What’s the business? Leander. Know then, Sir, that this disease which you would cure is a feigned disease. The doctors have reasoned upon it as they should do, and have not failed to say that it proceeds, one from the brain, one from the intestines, one from the spleen, one from the liver; but ’tis certain that love’s the true cause of it, and that Lucinda counterfeited this disease only to deliver herself from a match which she had been importuned to. But for fear they should see us together, let us retire from hence, and I’ll tell you as we go what I wish from you. Sganarel. Come, Sir, you have given me an inconceivable sensibility for your love; and I’ll spend all my physic in the affair, but the patient shall kick up, or else be yours.