continue..
on paper, takes up little room. Not quite as large as the googol, it is completely dwarfed by the googolplex. None the less, Eddington’s number, the googol, and the googolplex are finite. A veritable giant is Skewes’ number, even bigger than a googolplex. It gives information about the distribution of primes and looks like this: Or, for example, the total possible number of moves in a game of chess is: And speaking of chess, as the eminent English mathematician G.H.Hardy pointed out—if we imagine the entire universe as a chessboard, and the protons in it as chessmen, and if we agree to call any interchange in the position of two protons a “move” in this cosmic game, then the total number of possible moves, of all odd coincidences, would be Skewes’ number: No doubt most people believe that such numbers are part of the marvelous advance of science, and that a few generations ago, to say nothing of centuries back, no one in dream or fancy could have conceived of them. There is some truth in that idea. For one thing, the ancient cumbersome methods of mathematical notation made the writing of big numbers difficult, if not actually impossible. For another, the average citizen of today encounters such huge sums, representing armament expenditures and stellar distances, that he is quite conversant with, and immune to, big numbers. But there were clever people in ancient times. Poets in every age may have sung of the stars as infinite in number, when all they saw was, perhaps, three thousand. But to Archimedes, a number as large as a googol, or even larger, was not disconcerting. He says as much in an introductory passage in The Sand Reckoner, realizing that a number is not infinite merely because it is enormous. There are some, King Gelon, who think that the number of the sand is infinite in multitude; and I mean by the sand, not only that which exists about Syracuse and the rest of Sicily, but also that which is found in every region whether inhabited or uninhabited. Again there are some who, without regarding it as infinite, yet think that no number has been named which is great enough to exceed its multitude. And it is clear that they who hold this view, if they imagined a mass made up of sand in other respects as large as the mass of the earth, including in it all the seas and the hollows of the earth filled up to a height equal to that of the highest of the mountains, would be many times further still from recognizing that any number could be expressed which exceeded the multitude of the sand so taken. But I will try to show you by means of geometrical proofs, which you will be able to follow, that, of the numbers named by me and given in the work which I sent to Zeuxippus, some exceed not only the number of the mass of sand equal in magnitude to the earth filled up in the way described, but also that of a mass equal in magnitude to the universe. The Greeks had very definite ideas about the infinite. Just as we are indebted to them for much of our wit and our learning, so are we indebted to them for much of our sophistication about the infinite. Indeed, had we always retained their clear-sightedness, many of the problems and paradoxes connected with the infinite would never have arisen. Above everything, we must realize that “very big” and “infinite” are entirely different. By using the method of one-to-one correspondence, the protons and electrons in the universe can theoretically be counted as easily as the buttons on a vest. Sufficient and more than sufficient for that task, or for the task of counting any finite collection, are the integers. But measuring the totality of integers is another problem. To measure such a class demands a lofty viewpoint. Besides being, as the German mathematician Kronecker thought, the work of God, which requires courage to appraise, the class of integers is infinite—which is a great deal more inconvenient. It is worse than heresy to measure our own endless measuring rod! The problems of the infinite have challenged man’s mind and have fired his imagination as no other single problem in the history of thought. The infinite appears both strange and familiar, at times beyond our grasp, at times natural and easy to understand. In conquering it, man broke the fetters that bound him to earth. All his faculties were required for this conquest—his reasoning powers, his poetic fancy, his desire to know. To establish the science of the infinite involves the principle of mathematical induction. This principle affirms the power of reasoning by recurrence. It typifies almost all mathematical thinking, all that we do when we construct complex aggregates out of simple elements. It is, as Poincaré remarked, “at once necessary to the mathematician and irreducible to logic.” His statement of the principle is: “If a property be true of the number one, and if we establish that it is true of n+1, provided it be of n, it will be true of all the whole numbers.” Mathematical induction is not derived from experience, rather is it an inherent, intuitive, almost instinctive property of the mind. “What we have once done we can do again.” If we can construct numbers to ten, to a million, to a googol, we are led to believe that there is no stopping, no end. Convinced of this, we need not go on forever; the mind grasps that which it has never experienced—the infinite itself. Without any sense of discontinuity, without transgressing the canons of logic, the mathematician and philosopher have bridged in one stroke the gulf between the finite and the infinite. The mathematics of the infinite is a sheer affirmation of the inherent power of reasoning by recurrence. In the sense that “infinite” means “without end, without bound,” simply “not finite,” probably everyone understands its meaning. No difficulty arises where no precise definition is required. Nevertheless, in spite of the famous epigram that mathematics is the science in which we do not know what we are talking about, at least we shall have to agree to talk about the same thing. Apparently, even those of scientific temper can argue bitterly to the point of mutual vilification on subjects ranging from Marxism and dialectical materialism to group theory and the uncertainty principle, only to find, on the verge of exhaustion and collapse, that they are on the same side of the fence. Such arguments are generally the results of vague terminology; to assume that everyone is familiar with the precise mathematical definition of “infinite” is to build a new Tower of Babel. Before undertaking a definition, we might do well to glance backwards to see how mathematicians and philosophers of other times dealt with the problem. The infinite has a double aspect—the infinitely large, and the infinitely small. Repeated arguments and demonstrations, of apparently apodictic force, were advanced, overwhelmed, and once more resuscitated to prove or disprove its existence. Few of the arguments were ever refuted—each was buried under an avalanche of others. The happy result was that the problem never became any clearer. The warfare began in antiquity with the paradoxes of Zeno; it has never ceased. Fine points were debated with a fervor worthy of the earliest Christian martyrs, but without a tenth part of the acumen of medieval theologians. Today, some mathematicians think the infinite has been reduced to a state of vassalage. Others are still wondering what it is. Zeno’s puzzles may help to bring the problem into sharper focus. Zeno of Elea, it will be recalled, said some disquieting things about motion, with reference to an arrow, Achilles, and a tortoise. This strange company was employed on behalf of the tenet of Eleatic philosophy—that all motion is an illusion. It has been suggested, probably by “baffled critics,” that “Zeno had his tongue in cheek when he made his puzzles.” Regardless of motive, they are immeasurably subtle, and perhaps still defy solution. One paradox—the Dichotomy—states that it is impossible to cover any given distance. The argument: First, half the distance must be traversed, then half of the remaining distance, then again half of what remains, and so on. It follows that some portion of the distance to be covered always remains, and therefore motion is impossible! A solution of this paradox reads: The successive distances to be covered form an infinite geometric series: each term of which is half of the one before. Although this series has an infinite number of terms, its sum is finite and equals 1. Herein, it is said, lies the flaw of the Dichotomy. Zeno assumed that any totality composed of an infinite number of parts must, itself, be infinite, whereas we have just seen an infinite number of elements which make up the finite totality—1. The paradox of the tortoise states that Achilles, running to overtake