continue..
of research can be at once examined with the aid of all the immense resources which experiments on animals place in the hand of the physiologist. Owing to the shortness of the time that remains it is impossible to give illustrations of such questions. The investigation of conditioned reflexes is even of greater importance for the physiology of the highest parts of the central nervous system. Hitherto this department of physiology, throughout most of its extent, has been cluttered with foreign ideas, borrowed from psychology, but now there is a possibility of its being liberated from such harmful dependence. The conditioned reflexes disclose before us the vast field of the relations and reactions of animals to nature; this is a subject of immense extent and one that must be treated objectively. The physiologist can and must examine these reactions, using in connection with them progressive and systematic removal of parts of the central nervous system in order that he may ultimately arrive at an exact knowledge of the mechanism involved. And here arise at once some urgent and practical questions. Still one point remains. What relation is there between psychological data and the facts just described? What points of mutual correspondence are there? Who will occupy himself with these relations? and when? This relationship may be interesting even now, but it must be confessed that physiology has at present no serious reason for discussing it. Its immediate problem is to collect and to analyze the endless amount of objective material which presents itself. But it is plain that the conquest which physiology has yet to make consists for the most part of the actual solution of those questions which hitherto have vexed and perplexed humanity. Mankind will possess incalculable advantages and extraordinary control over human behavior when the scientific investigator will be able to subject his fellow men to the same external analysis as he would employ for any natural object, and when the human mind will contemplate itself not from within but from without. Must I say something about the relationship which exists between medicine and the subject of my address? Physiology and medicine are fundamentally inseparable. If the physician is in his actual practice, and even more important, in his ideals, a mechanic of the human organism, then inevitably every fresh discovery in physiology will sooner or later increase his power over this extraordinary machine, his power to conserve and repair this mechanism. It is extremely gratifying to me that in honoring the memory of a great naturalist and man of science I am able to make use of ideas and facts which from this single successful point of view promise to throw light upon the highest and most complicated part of the animal mechanism. I am fully persuaded of, and boldly express my confidence in, the ultimate triumph of this new method of research and I avow it the more fearlessly because Thomas Huxley, who is an example to all of us, fought with rare courage for the freedom and the rights of the scientific point of view. The foregoing comprises Chapter IV of lectures on conditioned reflexes . Translated by W. Horsley Gantt.