continue..
caution and address in dissimulation, my genius hinted to me what I had to fear; but don’t presume that I shall endure the vexation of seeing myself outrageously abused without being revenged. I know that one has no power over one’s inclinations, that love will always spring up independent; that one can never take possession of a heart by force, and that every mind is free to name its conqueror. Accordingly I should have had no reason of complaint, had you explained to me without dissimulation; and though you had rejected my addresses at the first sight, my heart had had no right of taxing anything but fortune. But to have my passion applauded by a deceitful confession, ’tis a treachery, ’tis a perfidy, which can’t meet with too great a punishment; and I shall give full swing to my resentments. Yes, yes, after such an outrage dread everything that can happen. I am no more myself, I am all rage. Pierced by the mortal wound which you have given me, my senses are no longer under the government of reason; I yield to the motions of a just fury, and shall not answer for what I may do. Célimène. Whence then, I pray, proceeds such raving? Tell me, have you lost your senses? Alcestes. Yes, yes, I lost ’em, when on sight of you I imbibed, to my misfortune, the poison which kills me, and when I thought of finding any sincerity in the treacherous charms with which I was enchanted. Célimène. What treachery then can you complain of? Alcestes. Oh! the double heart, how well it knows the art of dissimulation! But I have the means ready at hand to drive it to its last shifts; cast your eyes here, and know the strokes of your own pen; the discovery of this letter is sufficient to confound you, and against this evidence you can have nothing to answer. Célimène. And this is the thing that ruffles your spirits? Alcestes. Don’t you blush at sight of this writing? Célimène. And for what reason should I blush at it? Alcestes. How! Do you add assurance to artifice? Will you disown it because it is not signed? Célimène. Why disown a letter of my own handwriting? Alcestes. And can you look upon it without being in confusion at the crime of which the whole tenor of it accuses you? Célimène. You are in truth a most extravagant mortal. Alcestes. What? Do you thus outbrave this convincing proof? And has that which lets me see your tenderness for Orontes, nothing in it injurious to me, and shameful to you? Célimène. Orontes! Who told you that the letter is for him? Alcestes. The persons who this day put it into my hands. But I’m willing to grant that it should be for another; has my heart the less reason to complain of yours? Will you in reality, be less culpable towards me, on that account? Célimène. But if ’tis a woman this letter is written to, wherein does it hurt you? and what is there culpable in it? Alcestes. Ha! the turn is good, and the excuse admirable; I was not thinking of this stroke, I own it. And here I am absolutely convicted. Dare you have recourse to these gross impositions? and d’ye think people have lost their eyes? Let’s see, let’s see a little in what way, with what air, you will support a falsity so palpable; and how can you misapply all the words of a letter which shows so much passion, to a woman? To cover your want of constancy, adjust what I’m going to read— Célimène. I’ve no mind to’t. You are very merry to take such command upon you, and to tell me flatly to my face what you dare to tell me. Alcestes. No, without being in a passion, take a little pains to justify the terms here. Célimène. No, I won’t do it; and in this accident, whatever you think is of little importance to me. Alcestes. Pray, show me, I shall be satisfied, if you can but explain this letter for a woman. Célimène. No, ’tis for Orontes, and I would have you think so; I receive all his addresses with the greatest joy. I admire his discourse, I esteem his person, and I agree to whatever you please. Do, quarrel, let nothing stop you, and don’t torment me any more. Alcestes (aside). Heavens! Can anything be invented more cruel? And was ever heart treated in this manner? What! Here I am justly in a passion with her, ’tis I come to make my complaints, and I must bear the blame! She aggravates to the last degree my sorrow, and my suspicions; she suffers me to believe everything, and glories in everything; and at the same time, my heart is still cowardly enough not to break the chain that binds it, not to arm itself with a generous disdain against the ungrateful object it is but too much smitten with! (To célimène.) Ah! perfidious creature! how well you know to make your advantage of my extreme weakness even against myself, and manage to your own ends that prodigious excess of this fatal love which took rise from those traitorous eyes! Clear yourself at least from the crime which bears too hard upon me, and no longer affect being guilty of it. If it can be done, make me this letter innocent; my fondness consents to lend you a helping hand. Strive to appear true in this case, and I will strive to believe you such. Célimène. Go, you are a fool with your jealous transports, and don’t deserve the love one has for you. I would know, who could oblige me to descend to the baseness of dissembling with you? And why, if my heart inclined another way, I should not with sincerity tell you so? What! does not the obliging assurance of my sentiments defend me sufficiently against all your suspicions? Are they of any weight against such security? Is it not affronting me to hearken to ’em? And since our heart makes the utmost effort when it can resolve to confess it loves; since the honour of the sex, that enemy to love, so strongly opposes such like confessions; should the lover, who sees us get over such an obstacle for his sake, with impunity suspect that oracle? And is it not a crime not to rest secure of that which one cannot declare but after great struggles with oneself? Go, such suspicions deserve my indignation, and you are not worth one’s giving oneself any concern about. I am a fool, and am heartily vexed at my simplicity for still retaining any kindness for you; I ought to fix my esteem somewhere else, and give you just reason to complain of me. Alcestes. Ah, traitress! How strange is my weakness for you! You certainly deceive me with these tender expressions; but it signifies nothing, I must follow my destiny, my soul’s entirely resigned to your fidelity, I must see to the last what your heart will prove, and whether it can form so black a design as to deceive me. Célimène. No, you don’t love me as you ought to love. Alcestes. Oh! nothing is comparable to the extremity of my passion; and in the zeal I have to show this to all the world, I go so far as to form wishes against you. Yes, I could wish that no person thought you amiable, that you were reduced to a miserable condition, that Heaven at your infancy had bestowed nothing upon you, that you had had neither rank, birth, nor fortune, so that I might, by a more distinguishing sacrifice of my heart, have made you reparation for the injustice of such a fate; and that I might at this time have had the joy and the glory of seeing you receive your all at the hands of my love. Célimène. This is wishing one well after a strange manner! Preserve me Heaven from your ever having occasion—Here comes Master Du Bois, ridiculously equipped. Title: SCENE IV Alcestes. What means this equipage, and this frightful air? What’s the matter with you? Du Bois. Sir— Alcestes. Well? Du Bois. Strange things in abundance. Alcestes. What is it? Du Bois. We are scurvily situated, sir, in our affairs. Alcestes. How? Du Bois. Shall I speak aloud? Alcestes. Yes, speak quickly. Du Bois. Isn’t there somebody here— Alcestes. Pooh, what trifling is here! Will you speak? Du Bois. Sir, you must step aside. Alcestes. How? Du Bois. We must decamp without beat o’ drum. Alcestes. And why? Du Bois. I tell you we must quit this place. Alcestes. The cause? Du Bois. We must depart, sir, without taking leave. Alcestes. But for what reason all this stuff? Du Bois. By reason, sir, that we must pack and away. Alcestes. Plague! I shall infallibly crack your skull, rascal, if you don’t explain yourself in another