Work: The Doctor in Spite of Himself Field: doctor in spite of himself Author: Molière Title: ACT III Title: SCENE I Leander. Methinks I am not amiss thus for an apothecary, and as the father has scarce ever seen me, this change of dress and peruke is sufficient, I believe, to disguise me. Sganarel. Undoubtedly. Leander. All I could wish would be to know five or six strong physical terms, to adorn my discourse, and give me the air of a learned man. Sganarel. Come come, all that’s not necessary; the habit sufficeth; I know no more of the matter than you. Leander. What! Sganarel. The deuce take me if I understand anything of physic. You are a gentleman, and I’ll repose a confidence in you, as you have in me. Leander. What, you are not actually— Sganarel. No, I tell you, they made me a doctor in spite of my teeth. I never attempted to be so learned as that; my studies lasted only till I was six years old. I know not by what means this notion is come to ’em: but when I found that they would make me a doctor by violence, I resolved to be one at the expense of those I might have to do with. Nevertheless, you can’t imagine how the error is spread about, and in what manner every one’s possessed to believe me a skilful man. They come to seek me from all parts; and if things go on always the same, I intend to keep to physic all my lifetime. I find ’tis the best trade of all; for be it that we do good, or be it that we do ill, we are always paid after the same rate. The bad work never falls upon our back, and we cut out as we please the stuff we work on. A shoemaker can’t spoil a scrap of leather in making a pair of shoes but he’s obliged to pay sauce for it, when here we may spoil a man without costing one anything. The blunders are not ours; the fault’s always in him that dies. In short, the good of this profession is that amongst the dead there is an honesty, a discretion the greatest in the world; you never find ’em complain of the physician that killed ’em. Leander. ’Tis true, the dead are very honest people in this respect. Sganarel (observing men coming to him). Here are people who look as if they came to consult me. (To leander.) Go and wait for me near your mistress’s house. Title: SCENE II Thibaut. Zir, we come to search for ye, zon Perrin and I. Sganarel. What’s the matter? Thibaut. His poor mother, whoase naime is Parette, has been this zix months in a zick bed. Sganarel (holding out his hand as to receive money). What would you have me do to her? Thibaut. I’se would ha’ ye, zir, gi’ us some little druggery ware to heal her withal. Sganarel. I must see what she’s sick of. Thibaut. She’s zick of an hypocrisy, zir. Sganarel. Of an hypocrisy? Thibaut. Ay, that’s to zay, she’s bloated up all over, and folk do zay that ’tis a deal of zeriosities that she have in her body, and that her liver, her belly, or her spleen, as you would call it, in plaice of making blood make nothing but water. She ha’ one day out of two, the quotiguian fever, with lassitudes and pains in the muscles of her legs. One hears fleaims in her throat that are e’en ready to choke her. Zometimes she’s ta’en with sincops and conversions, that we do think she’s gone off. We have in our parish, a poticary, with reverence be it spoken, who has given her I know not how much historicks, and ’t’ave cost me moare than a douzen of good crawns in clysters may’t please you, in apostumes which they made her take, in hyacinth infactions, and cordial portions. But all this, as they say, was noathing but a nointment of fiddle-faddle. He’d a’ gi’n her some of a certain drug, which they call Ametile Wine; but I’se was under downright fear that ’twould send her to her forefathers, for they zay that thease great doctors kill I know not how many people with that zame invantion. Sganarel (holding his hand out all the while). Let’s come to the point, Friend, let’s come to the point. Thibaut. The point is, zir, that we are come to bag o’ ye, to tell us what we mun do. Sganarel. I don’t understand you in the least. Perrin. My mother is zick, zir, and here be two crawns which we ha’ brought ye to gee us some cure. Sganarel. Oh! I understand you. There’s a lad that speaks clearly, and explains himself as he should do. You say that your mother is sick of a dropsy, that she’s swelled all over the body, that she has a fever, with pains in her legs, and that she’s taken by turns, with sincopes and convulsions, that’s to say, with fainting fits. Perrin. Ay, yes, zir, that’s exactly the matter. Sganarel. I comprehended at once what you said. You have a father who does not know what he says. Now then you’d have a remedy from me? Perrin. Ay, zir. Sganarel. A remedy to cure her? Perrin. That’s what I mean. Sganarel. Take this, there’s a piece of cheese, which you must make her take. Perrin. Cheese, zir. Sganarel. Yes, ’tis prepared cheese, in which there is mixed gold, coral, pearls, and abundance of other costly things. Perrin. Zir, we’re mainly obliged t’ye, and we’ll go make her take it this very instont. Sganarel. Go. If she dies, don’t fail to have her buried as handsomely as you can. Title: SCENE III Sganarel. Here’s the jolly nurse. Ah! nurse of my heart, I’m transported with this meeting; the sight of you is rhubarb, cassia, and senna, which purge away all melancholy from my mind. Jacqueline. By my troth, Mr. Doctor, that’s too foinly said for me, I’se doan’t understond your Lattan at all. Sganarel. Get sick, I beseech you, Nurse, get sick for my sake. I should take all the pleasure in the world to cure you. Jacqueline. Your zarvant, zir, I’d much rather choose not to be cured. Sganarel. I pity you, fair nurse, in having such a jealous troublesome husband as he you have. Jacqueline. What would ye ha’ me do, zir, ’tis a penitence for my offences, and where the goat’s tied, there she must browse. Sganarel. What? Such a rustic as that? A fellow that watches you continually, and won’t let anybody speak to you? Jacqueline. Alack, you’ve not zeen anything of’n yet; this is nothing but a small zample of his ill nature. Sganarel. Is it possible, and can a fellow have so mean a spirit, as to use such a person as you are, ill? Ah! there are some, sweet nurse, that I know, and who are not far from hence, that would think themselves happy but to kiss the little tops of your toes! Why should one so well made fall into such hands? A mere animal, a brute, a fool, a sot— Forgive me, Nurse, for speaking in this manner of your husband. Jacqueline. Ah! Sir, I’se know well enow that a deserves all those naimes. Sganarel. Ay, undoubtedly, Nurse, he does deserve ’em, and he deserves further that you should plant something on his head to punish him for the suspicions he has. Jacqueline. ’Tis very true that if I’se had nothing in sight but his interest, it might drive me to do some strange thing. Sganarel. I’faith you’d not do ill to be revenged on him with someone. ’Tis a fellow, I tell you, who richly deserves it, and if I were fortunate enough, fair nurse, to be pitched on for—(Whilst sganarel reaches out his arm to embrace jacqueline, lucas thrusts his head under his arm, and steps between them; sganarel and jacqueline look at lucas, and go off on different sides.) Title: SCENE IV Géronte. Ho, Lucas, hast thou not seen our doctor here? Lucas. Yes, the deuce had ’en, I’se ha’ zeen him, and my wife too. Géronte. Where is’t that he can be then? Lucas. I don’t know; but I wish he were at the devil. Géronte. Go and see a little how my daughter does. Title: SCENE V Géronte. Oh, Sir, I have been asking where you were. Sganarel. I was amusing myself in your court, to carry off the superfluity of the liquor. How does the patient do? Géronte. A little worse since your remedy. Sganarel. So much the better. ’Tis a sign it operates. Géronte. Yes; but I fear lest it choke her in operating. Sganarel. Don’t be in pain about that; I have medicines which despise all distempers, and I should be glad to see her at death’s door. Géronte. Who is this