continue..
have nothing to fear from a frank confession, I consent to it on my side. Alcestes. And I demand it; ’tis that I have here the boldness, above all, to insist on and I don’t want to see any of your management. Your great study is to keep in with all the world, but no more amusement, no more uncertainty; you must explain yourself clearly upon this affair, otherways I shall take your refusal for a decision. I shall know, for my part, how to interpret this silence, and shall reckon upon the worst I can think to be really said. Orontes. I am obliged to you, sir, for this warmth, and I here say the same thing to her that you do. Célimène. How you tease me here with this obstinacy! Is there any reason in what you demand? And have I not told you what motive restrains me? I’ll be judged by Éliante who comes here. Title: SCENE III Célimène. Here am I persecuted, cousin, by people whose humour seems to me to be concerted. They both of ’em, with the same heat, will needs have me declare which of ’em my heart makes choice of; and that by a sentence which I must pronounce to his face, I should forbid one of the two all the application he can make. Tell me whether this is ever done? Éliante. Don’t consult me upon the subject: you may perhaps address yourself to a very wrong person. I am for the people who speak their thoughts. Orontes. ’Tis in vain, madam, for you to excuse yourself. Alcestes. All your evasions will be but ill-seconded. Orontes. You must, you must speak, and have done wavering. Alcestes. You need do no more than continue silent. Orontes. I desire but one word to end our debates. Alcestes. And I, for my share, understand you, if you don’t speak at all. Title: SCENE IV Acastes. Madam, we two come, no offence, to clear up a certain trifling affair. Clitander (to orontes and alcestes). You are here very apropos, gentlemen, and you are also concerned in this affair. Arsinoé (to célimène). Madam, you will be surprised at sight of me, but these gentlemen are the occasion of my coming. They came to me, and complained of a trick which it can’t enter into my heart to give credit to. I have too high an esteem for the native honesty of your mind ever to believe you capable of such a crime; my eyes contradicted their strongest proofs, and my friendship passing by some trifling words we had, I was willing to bear ’em company to your house, to see you clear yourself of this calumny. Acastes. Yes, madam, let us see, with calmness of spirit, how you will go about to support this; was this letter written by you to Clitander? Clitander. Did you write this tender epistle to Acastes? Acastes (to orontes and alcestes). Gentlemen, these lines have nothing in them obscure to you. I doubt not but her civility has made you too well acquainted with her hand. But this is well enough worth the trouble of reading. You are a strange man, Clitander, to condemn my gaiety, and to reproach me, that I am never so merry, as when I am not with you. There is nothing so unjust; and if you don’t come very soon, to ask my pardon for this offence, I’ll never pardon it as long as I live. Our clumsy Flemish viscount— He should have been here. Our clumsy Flemish viscount, with whom you begin your complaints, is a man who can never hit my taste; and since the time I saw him spitting in a pool for full three quarters of an hour, to make circles, I never could have a good opinion of him. As to the little marquis— That’s myself, gentlemen, without vanity. As to the little marquis who held me so long by the hand yesterday, I think there is nothing so diminutive as his whole person; and ’tis one of your gentry of merit, who have nothing but their sword to trust to. As to the man with green ribbons— Your turn now, sir. As to the man with green ribbons, he diverts me sometimes with his blunt ways, and his fantastical peevishness. But there are a thousand occasions when I think him the most troublesome creature in the world. And for the sonnet-monger— Now for your packet. (To orontes.) And for the sonnet-monger who pushes himself forward for a wit, and will be an author in spite of the world, I cannot take the pains to hearken to what he says; and his prose fatigues me as much as his verse. Persuade yourself, therefore, that I am not always diverted so well as you imagine; that I find more matter of complaint than I could wish in all the parties I am drawn into; and that the presence of those we love gives a marvellous relish to the pleasures we enjoy. Clitander. Now for myself. Your Clitander, whom you talk to me of, and who is so much of the affected beau, is the last man I should have a kindness for. He is extravagant in persuading himself one loves him; and you are so in believing one does not love you. To be reasonable therefore, change sentiments with him; and see me as often as you can, to help me bear the trouble of being besieged by him. We have here the model of a very fine character, madam, and you know what to call it. ’Tis enough, we shall both of us go show this glorious portrait of your heart in all places. Acastes. I could say a good deal to you, and a fine subject it is; but I don’t hold you worthy my anger; and I could let you see, that your little marquises, for their consolation, have hearts of a much higher price. Title: SCENE V Orontes. What! am I thus pulled to pieces after all the things you have written me? And does your heart, adorned with the fair appearances of love, engage itself by turns to all mankind? Go, I was too much a dupe, and shall be so no longer, you do me a favour in letting me know you; I am the richer by a heart which you thus restore to me, and have my revenge in what you lose. (To alcestes.) Sir, I don’t know any obstacle there is now to your passion, and you may conclude matters with the lady. Title: SCENE VI Arsinoé (to célimène). This is certainly one of the basest actions in the world, I can be no longer silent, I’m shocked at it. Were there ever any proceedings like yours, madam? I don’t enter into the concerns of the rest. (Pointing to alcestes.) But this gentleman, who had fixed your happiness, a man of merit and honour as he is, and who dotes on you to idolatry, should he— Alcestes. Pray, madam, leave me to manage my own interests in this affair myself, and don’t charge yourself with these superfluous cares. In vain does my heart observe you espouse its quarrel, ’tis not in a condition to requite you for this great zeal; and you are not the person I could think of, should I strive to revenge myself by another choice. Arsinoé. Umph! Do you fancy, sir, I have any such thought, and that I should be in such a violent hurry to have you? You have a great deal of vanity, I think, in your temper, if you can flatter yourself with such a belief. That lady’s refuse is a sort of ware one would be much to blame to be taken with. Pray be undeceived, and carry it less haughtily, people of my condition are not for such as you. You will do well to sigh for her still, and I long to see such a fine match. Title: SCENE VII Alcestes (to céliméne). Well, in spite of all I see, I have hitherto been silent, and have let all the world speak before me. Have I commanded myself long enough? and may I now— Célimène. Yes, you may say everything. You are in the right when you complain, and reproach me after any manner you please. I’m to blame. I confess it, and my confused mind does not seek to put you off with any frivolous excuse. I despised the fury of the rest here, but I own my crime in respect to you; certainly your resentment is just. I know how criminal I must appear to you, that everything speaks my unfaithfulness to you, and that in short you have reason to hate me. Do so, I consent to it. Alcestes. But can I do it, traitress, can I thus get the better of all my fondness? And though I should most ardently wish to hate you, shall I find a heart