continue..
from their embarrassment, but there seemed to be no way out of it. No one spoke; and a panic seized them all, lest suddenly this ceremonial lie should somehow be shattered, and the absolute truth become manifest to all. Liza was the first to speak. She broke the silence. She wished to hide what all felt, but she betrayed it. “One thing is certain—if we are going, it is time,” she said, glancing at her watch, her father’s gift; and giving the young man a sign, scarcely perceptible, and yet understood by him, she smiled, and arose in her rustling dress. All arose, said good-by, and went. When they had gone, Ivan Ilyitch thought that he felt easier: the lying was at an end; it had gone with them; but the pain remained. Always this same pain, always this same terror, made it hard as hard could be. There was no easing of it. It grew ever worse, always worse. Again minute after minute dragged by, hour after hour, forever the same monotony, and forever endless, and forever more terrible—the inevitable end. “Yes, send me Gerasim,” was his reply to Piotr’s question. Late at night his wife returned. She came in on her tiptoes, but he heard her; he opened his eyes, and quickly closed them again. She wanted to send Gerasim away, and sit with him herself. He opened his eyes, and said: “No, go away.” “You suffer very much.” “It makes no difference.” “Take some opium.” He consented, and drank it. She went. Until three o’clock he was in a painful sleep. It seemed to him that they were forcing him cruelly into a narrow sack, black and deep; and they kept crowding him down, but could not force him in. And this performance, horrible for him, was accompanied with anguish. And he was afraid, and yet wished to get in, and struggled against it, and yet tried to help. And here suddenly he broke through, and fell…and awoke. There was Gerasim still sitting at his feet on the bed, dozing peacefully, patiently. But he was lying there with his emaciated legs in stockings resting on his shoulders, the same candle with its shade, and the same never ending pain. “Go away, Gerasim,” he whispered. “It’s nothing; I will sit here a little while.” “No, go away.” He took down his legs, lay on his side on his arm, and began to pity himself. He waited only until Gerasim had gone into the next room, and then he no longer tried to control himself, but wept like a child. He wept over his helplessness, over his terrible loneliness, over the cruelty of men, over the cruelty of God, over the absence of God. “Why hast Thou done this? Why didst Thou place me here? Why, why dost Thou torture me so horribly?” He expected no reply; and he wept because there was none, and could be none. The pain seized him again; but he did not stir, did not call. He said to himself: “There, now, again, now strike! But why? What have I done to Thee? Why is it?” Then he became silent; ceased not only to weep, ceased to breathe, and became all attention: as it were, he heard, not a voice speaking with sounds, but the voice of his soul, the tide of his thoughts, arising in him. “What dost thou need?” was the first clear concept possible to be expressed in words which he heard. “‘What dost thou need? What dost thou need?’” he said to himself. “What? Freedom from suffering. To live,” he replied. And again he gave his attention, with such effort that already he did not even notice his pain. “To live? how live?” asked the voice of his soul. “Yes, to live as I used to live—well, pleasantly.” “How didst thou live before when thou didst live well and pleasantly?” asked the voice. And he began to call up in his imagination the best moments of his pleasant life. But, strangely enough, all these best moments of his pleasant life seemed to him absolutely different from what they had seemed then—all, except the earliest remembrances of his childhood. There, in childhood, was something really pleasant, which would give new zest to life if it were to return. But the person who had enjoyed that pleasant existence was no more; it was as if it were the remembrance of someone else. As soon as the period began which had produced the present he, Ivan Ilyitch, all the pleasures which seemed such then, now in his eyes dwindled away, and changed into something of no account, and even disgusting. And the farther he departed from infancy, and the nearer he came to the present, so much the more unimportant and dubious were the pleasures. This began in the law school. There was still something even then which was truly good; then there was gaiety, there was friendship, there were hopes. But in the upper classes these good moments became rarer. Then, in the time of his first service at the governor’s, again appeared good moments; these were the recollections of love for a woman. Then all this became confused, and the happy time grew less. The nearer he came to the present, the worse it grew, and still worse and worse it grew. “My marriage…so unexpected, and disillusionment and my wife’s breath, and sensuality, hypocrisy! And this dead service, and these labors for money; and thus one year, and two, and ten, and twenty, and always the same thing. And the longer it went, the more dead it became. “It is as if all the time I were going down the mountain, while thinking that I was climbing it. So it was. According to public opinion, I was climbing the mountain; and all the time my life was gliding away from under my feet…. And here it is already…die! “What is this? Why? It cannot be! It cannot be that life has been so irrational, so disgusting. But even if it is so disgusting and irrational, still, why die, and die in such agony? There is no reason. “Can it be that I did not live as I ought?” suddenly came into his head. “But how can that be, when I have done all that it was my duty to do?” he asked himself. And immediately he put away this sole explanation of the enigma of life and death as something absolutely impossible. “What dost thou wish now?—To live? To live how? To live as thou livest in court when the usher proclaims, ‘The court is coming! the court is coming’? “The court is coming—the court,” he repeated to himself. “Here it is, the court. Yes; but I am not guilty,” he cried with indignation. “What for?” And he ceased to weep; and, turning his face to the wall, he began to think about that one thing, and that alone. “Why, wherefore, all this horror?” But, in spite of all his thoughts, he received no answer. And when the thought occurred to him, as it had often occurred to him, that all this came from the fact that he had not lived as he should, he instantly remembered all the correctness of his life, and he drove away this strange thought. Thus two weeks longer passed. Ivan Ilyitch no longer got up from the divan. He did not wish to lie in bed, and he lay on the divan. And, lying almost all the time with his face to the wall, he still suffered in solitude the same inexplicable sufferings, and still thought in solitude the same inexplicable thought. “What is this? Is it true that this is death?” And an inward voice responded: “Yes, it is true.” “Why these torments?” And the voice responded: “But it is so. There is no why.” Farther and beyond this, there was nothing. From the very beginning of his malady, from the time when Ivan Ilyitch for the first time went to the doctor, his life was divided into two conflicting tendencies, alternately succeeding each other. Now it was despair, and the expectation of an incomprehensible and frightful death; now it was hope, and the observation of the functional activity of his body, so full of interest for him. Now before his eyes was the kidney, or the intestine, which, for the time being, failed to fulfill its duty. Then it was that incomprehensible, horrible death, from which it was impossible for anyone to escape. These two mental states, from the very beginning of his illness, kept alternating with one another. But the farther the illness progressed, the more dubious and fantastical became his ideas about the kidney, and the more real his consciousness of approaching death. He had but to call to mind what he had been three months before, and what he was now, to call to mind with what regularity he had been descending the mountain; and that was sufficient for all