continue..
commanding officer again and throw ing giuseppe off). My man at last. (Pointing to the inner door) Go. Attend to your business: the lady is calling you. (He goes to the fireplace and stands with his back to it with a determined military air.) Giuseppe (with bated breath, snatching up his tray). Certainly, excellency. (He hurries out by the inner door.) The Man’s Voice (impatiently). Are you all asleep here? The other door is kicked rudely open. A dusty sub-lieutenant bursts into the room. He is a tall chuckle-headed young man of 24, with the complexion and style of a man of rank, and a self-assurance on that ground which the French Revolution has failed to shake in the smallest degree. He has a thick silly lip, an eager credulous eye, an obstinate nose, and a loud confident voice. A young man without fear, without reverence, without imagination, without sense, hope lessly insusceptible to the Napoleonic or any other idea, stupen dously egotistical, eminently qualified to rush in where angels fear to tread, yet of a vigorous babbling vitality which bustles him into the thick of things. He is just now boiling with vexation, attributable by a superficial observer to his impatience at not being promptly at tended to by the staff of the inn, but in which a more discerning eye can perceive a certain moral depth, indicating a more permanent and momentous grievance. On seeing napoleon , he is sufficiently taken aback to check himself and salute; but he does not betray by his manner any of that prophetic consciousness of Marengo and Auster litz, Waterloo and St. Helena, or the Napoleonic pictures of Dela roche and Meissonier, which later ages expect from him . Napoleon (watch in hand). Well, sir, you have come at last. Your instructions were that I should arrive here at six, and find you waiting for me with my mail from Paris and with despatches. It is now twenty minutes to eight. You were sent on this service as a hard rider with the fastest horse in the camp. You arrive a hundred minutes late, on foot. Where is your horse? The Lieutenant (moodily pulling of his gloves and dashing them with his cap and whip on the table). Ah! where indeed? That’s just what I should like to know, General. (With emotion) You don’t know how fond I was of that horse. Napoleon (angrily sarcastic). Indeed! (With sudden misgiving) Where are the letters and despatches? The Lieutenant (importantly, rather pleased than otherwise at having some remarkable news). I don’t know. Napoleon (unable to believe his ears). You don’t know! Lieutenant. No more than you do, General. Now I suppose I shall be court-martialled. Well, I don’t mind being court-martialled; but (with solemn determination) I tell you, General, if ever I catch that innocent-looking youth, I’ll spoil his beauty, the slimy little liar! I’ll make a picture of him. I’ll— Napoleon (advancing from the hearth to the table). What innocent-looking youth? Pull yourself together, sir, will you; and give an account of yourself. Lieutenant (facing him at the opposite side of the table, leaning on it with his fists). Oh, I’m all right, General: I’m perfectly ready to give an account of myself. I shall make the court-martial thoroughly understand that the fault was not mine. Advantage has been taken of the better side of my nature; and I’m not ashamed of it. But with all respect to you as my commanding officer, General, I say again that if ever I set eyes on that son of Satan, I’ll— Napoleon (angrily). So you said before. Lieutenant (drawing himself upright). I say it again. Just wait until I catch him. Just wait: that’s all. (He folds his arms resolutely, and breathes hard, with compressed lips.) Napoleon. I am waiting, sir. For your explanation. Lieutenant (confidently). You’ll change your tone, General, when you hear what has happened to me. Napoleon. Nothing has happened to you, sir: you are alive and not disabled. Where are the papers entrusted to you? Lieutenant. Nothing happened to me! Nothing!! He swore eternal brotherhood with me. Was that nothing? He said my eyes reminded him of his sister’s eyes. Was that nothing? He cried—actually cried— over the story of my separation from Angelica. Was that nothing? He paid for both bottles of wine, though he only ate bread and grapes himself. Perhaps you call that nothing. He gave me his pistols and his horse and his despatches—most important despatches— and let me go away with them. (Triumphantly, seeing that he has reduced napoleon to blank stupefaction) Was that nothing? Napoleon (enfeebled by astonishment). What did he do that for? Lieutenant (as if the reason were obvious). To show his confidence in me, of course. (napoleon’s jaw does not exactly drop; but its hinges become nerveless.) And I was worthy of his confidence: I brought them all back honourably. But would you believe it? when I trusted him with my pistols, and my horse, and my despatches— Napoleon. What the devil did you do that for? Lieutenant. I’m telling you: to show my confidence in him. And he betrayed it! abused it! never came back again! The thief! the swindler! the heartless treacherous little blackguard! You call that nothing, I suppose. But look here, General (again resorting to the table with his fists for greater emphasis): you may put up with this outrage from the Austrians if you like; but speaking for myself personally, I tell you that if ever I catch— Napoleon (turning on his heel in disgust and irritably resuming his march to and fro). Yes: you have said that more than once already. Lieutenant (excitedly). More than once! I’ll say it fifty times; and what’s more, I’ll do it. You’ll see, General. I’ll show my confidence in him, so I will. I’ll— Napoleon. Yes, yes, sir: no doubt you will. What kind of man was he? Lieutenant. Well, I should think you ought to be able to tell from his conduct the kind of man he was. Napoleon. Psha! What was he like? Lieutenant. Like! He was like—well, you ought to have just seen the fellow: that will give you a notion of what he was like. He won’t be like it five minutes after I catch him; for I tell you that if ever— Napoleon (shouting furiously for the innkeeper). Giuseppe! (To the lieutenant, out of all patience) Hold your tongue, sir, if you can. Lieutenant (plaintively). I warn you it’s no use trying to put the blame on me. How was I to know the sort of fellow he was? (He takes a chair from between the sideboard and the outer door; places it near the table; and sits down.) If you only knew how hungry and tired I am, you’d have more consideration. Giuseppe (returning). What is it, excellency? Napoleon (struggling with his temper). Take this—this officer. Feed him; and put him to bed, if necessary. When he is in his right mind again, find out what has happened to him and bring me word. (To the lieutenant) Consider yourself under arrest, sir. Lieutenant (with sulky stiffness). I was prepared for that. It takes a gentleman to understand a gentleman. (He throws his sword on the table.) Giuseppe (with sympathetic concern). Have you been attacked by the Austrians, Lieutenant? Dear! dear! dear! Lieutenant (contemptuously). Attacked! I could have broken his back between my finger and thumb. I wish I had, now. No: it was by appealing to the better side of my nature: that’s what I can’t get over. He said he’d never met a man he liked so much as me. He put his handkerchief round my neck because a gnat bit me, and my stock was chafing it. Look! (He pulls a handkerchief from his stock. giuseppe takes it and examines it.) Giuseppe (to napoleon). A lady’s handkerchief, excellency. (He smells it.) Perfumed. Napoleon. Eh? (He takes it and looks at it attentively.) Hm! (He smells it.) Ha! (He walks thoughtfully across the room, looking at the hank kerchief, which he finally sticks in the breast of his coat.) Lieutenant. Good enough for him, anyhow. I noticed that he had a woman’s hands when he touched my neck, with his coaxing fawning ways, the mean effeminate little hound. (Lowering his voice with thrilling intensity) But mark my words, General. If ever— The Lady’s Voice (outside, as before). Giuseppe! Lieutenant (petrified). What was that? Giuseppe. Only a lady upstairs, Lieutenant, calling me. Lieutenant. Lady! Voice. Giuseppe, Giuseppe: where are you? Lieutenant (murderously). Give me that sword. (He snatches up the sword and draws it.) Giuseppe (rushing forward and seizing his right arm). What are you thinking of, Lieutenant? It’s a lady: don’t you hear? It’s a woman’s voice. Lieutenant. It’s his voice, I tell you. Let me go. (He breaks away, and rushes to the edge of the veranda, where he posts himself, sword in hand, watching the door like a cat watching a