continue..
live stock—and that’s only a few pointers and ponies. But pray, Mr. Premium, are you acquainted at all with any of my connections? Sir Oliver. Why, to say truth, I am. Charles Surface. Then you must know that I have a devilish rich uncle in the East Indies, Sir Oliver Surface, from whom I have the greatest expectations. Sir Oliver. That you have a wealthy uncle, I have heard—but how your expectations will turn out is more, I believe, than you can tell. Charles Surface. Oh, no!—there can be no doubt—they tell me I’m a prodigious favourite—and that he talks of leaving me everything. Sir Oliver. Indeed! this is the first I’ve heard on’t. Charles Surface. Yes, yes, ’tis just so. Moses knows ’tis true; don’t you, Moses? Moses. Oh, yes! I’ll swear to’t. Sir Oliver (aside). Egad, they’ll persuade me presently I’m at Bengal. Charles Surface. Now I propose, Mr. Premium, if it’s agreeable to you, a post-obit on Sir Oliver’s life; though at the same time the old fellow has been so liberal to me that I give you my word I should be very sorry to hear anything had happened to him. Sir Oliver. Not more than I should, I assure you. But the bond you mention happens to be just the worst security you could offer me—for I might live to a hundred and never recover the principal. Charles Surface. Oh, yes, you would!—the moment Sir Oliver dies, you know, you’d come on me for the money. Sir Oliver. Then I believe I should be the most unwelcome dun you ever had in your life. Charles Surface. What! I suppose you are afraid now that Sir Oliver is too good a life? Sir Oliver. No, indeed I am not—though I have heard he is as hale and healthy as any man of his years in Christendom. Charles Surface. There again you are misinformed. No, no, the climate has hurt him considerably, poor uncle Oliver. Yes, he breaks apace, I’m told—and so much altered lately that his nearest relations don’t know him. Sir Oliver. No! Ha! ha! ha! so much altered lately that his relations don’t know him! Ha! ha! ha! that’s droll, egad—ha! ha! ha! Charles Surface. Ha! ha!—you’re glad to hear that, little Premium. Sir Oliver. No, no, I’m not. Charles Surface. Yes, yes, you are—ha! ha! ha!—you know that mends your chance. Sir Oliver. But I’m told Sir Oliver is coming over—nay, some say he is actually arrived. Charles Surface. Pshaw! sure I must know better than you whether he’s come or not. No, no, rely on’t, he is at this moment at Calcutta, isn’t he, Moses? Moses. Oh, yes, certainly. Sir Oliver. Very true, as you say, you must know better than I, though I have it from pretty good authority—haven’t I, Moses? Moses. Yes, most undoubted! Sir Oliver. But, sir, as I understand you want a few hundreds immediately, is there nothing you would dispose of? Charles Surface. How do you mean? Sir Oliver. For instance, now—I have heard—that your father left behind him a great quantity of massy old plate. Charles Surface. O lud! that’s gone long ago—Moses can tell you how better than I can. Sir Oliver. Good lack! all the family race-cups and corporation-bowls! (Aside.)—Then it was also supposed that his library was one of the most valuable and complete. Charles Surface. Yes, yes, so it was—vastly too much so for a private gentleman—for my part, I was always of a communicative disposition, so I thought it a shame to keep so much knowledge to myself. Sir Oliver (aside). Mercy on me! learning that had run in the family like an heirloom!—(Aloud.) Pray, what are become of the books? Charles Surface. You must inquire of the auctioneer, Master Premium, for I don’t believe even Moses can direct you there. Moses. I never meddle with books. Sir Oliver. So, so, nothing of the family property left, I suppose? Charles Surface. Not much, indeed; unless you have a mind to the family pictures. I have got a room full of ancestors above—and if you have a taste for old paintings, egad, you shall have ’em a bargain! Sir Oliver. Hey! and the devil! sure, you wouldn’t sell your forefathers, would you? Charles Surface. Every man of ’em, to the best bidder. Sir Oliver. What! your great-uncles and aunts? Charles Surface. Aye, and my great-grandfathers and grandmothers too. Sir Oliver. Now I give him up! (Aside.)—What the plague, have you no bowels for your own kindred? Odd’s life! do you take me for Shylock in the play, that you would raise money of me on your own flesh and blood? Charles Surface. Nay, my little broker, don’t be angry: what need you care, if you have your money’s worth? Sir Oliver. Well, I’ll be the purchaser—I think I can dispose of the family.—(Aside.) Oh, I’ll never forgive him this! never! Enter careless. Careless. Come, Charles, what keeps you? Charles Surface. I can’t come yet. I’faith! we are going to have a sale above—here’s little Premium will buy all my ancestors! Careless. Oh, burn your ancestors! Charles Surface. No, he may do that afterwards, if he pleases. Stay, Careless, we want you; egad, you shall be auctioneer—so come along with us. Careless. Oh, have with you, if that’s the case. I can handle a hammer as well as a dice box! Sir Oliver. Oh, the profligates! (Aside.) Charles Surface. Come, Moses, you shall be appraiser, if we want one.—Gad’s life, little Premium, you don’t seem to like the business. Sir Oliver. Oh, yes, I do, vastly! Ha! ha! yes, yes, I think it a rare joke to sell one’s family by auction—ha! ha!—(Aside.) Oh, the prodigal! Charles Surface. To be sure! when a man wants money, where the plague should he get assistance, if he can’t make free with his own relations? (Exeunt.)