continue..
way you look. Smithers (warningly). Maybe it’s gettin’ time for you to resign—with that bloomin’ silver bullet, wot? (He finishes with a mocking grin.) Jones (puzzled). What’s dat you say? Talk plain. Smithers. Ain’t noticed any of the guards or servants about the place today, I ’aven’t. Jones (carelessly). Dey’re all out in de garden sleepin’ under de trees. When I sleeps, dey sneaks a sleep, too, and I pretends I never suspicions it. All I got to do is to ring de bell and dey come flyin’, makin’ a bluff dey was wukin’ all de time. Smithers (in the same mocking tone). Ring the bell now an’ you’ll bloody well see what I means. Jones (startled to alertness, but preserving the same careless tone). Sho’ I rings. (He reaches below the throne and pulls out a big, common dinner bell which is painted the same vivid scarlet as the throne. He rings this vigorously—then stops to listen. Then he goes to both doors, rings again, and looks out.) Smithers (watching him with malicious satisfaction, after a pause—mockingly). The bloody ship is sinkin’ an’ the bleedin’ rats ’as slung their ’ooks. Jones (in a sudden fit of anger flings the bell clattering into a corner). Low-flung, woods’ niggers! (Then catching smithers’ eye on him, he controls himself and suddenly bursts into a low chuckling laugh). Reckon I overplays my hand dis once! A man can’t take de pot on a bobtailed flush all de time. Was I sayin’ I’d sit in six months mo’? Well, I’se changed my mind den. I cashes in and resigns de job of Emperor right dis minute. Smithers (with real admiration). Blimey, but you’re a cool bird, and no mistake. Jones. No use’n fussin’. When I knows de game’s up I kisses it good-by widout no long waits. Dey’ve all run off to de hills, ain’t dey? Smithers. Yes—every bleedin’ man jack of ’em. Jones. Den de revolution is at de post. And de Emperor better git his feet smokin’ up de trail. (He starts for the door in rear.) Smithers. Goin’ out to look for your ’orse? Yer won’t find any. They steals the ’orses first thing. Mine was gone when I went for ’im this mornin’. That’s wot first give me a suspicion of wot was up. Jones (alarmed for a second, scratches his head, then philosophically). Well, den I hoofs it. Feet, do yo’ duty! (He pulls out a gold watch and looks at it) Three-thuty. Sundown’s at six-thuty or dereabouts. (Puts his watch back—with cool confidence) I got plenty o’ time to make it easy. Smithers. Don’t be so bloomin’ sure of it. They’ll be after you ’ot and ’eavy. Ole Lem is at the bottom o’ this business an’ ’e ’ates you like ’ell. ’E’d rather do for you than eat ’is dinner, ’e would! Jones (scornfully). Dat fool no-count nigger! Does you think I’se scared o’ him? I stands him on his thick head more’n once befo’ dis, and I does it again if he comes in my way—(Fiercely) And dis time I leave him a dead nigger fo’ sho’! Smithers. You’ll ’ave to cut through the big forest—an’ these blacks ’ere can sniff and follow a trail in the dark like ’ounds. You’d ’ave to ’ustle to get through that forest in twelve hours even if you knew all the bloomin’ trails like a native. Jones (with indignant scorn). Look-a-heah, white man! Does you think I’se a natural bo’n fool? Give me credit fo’ havin’ some sense, fo’ Lawd’s sake! Don’t you s’pose I’se looked ahead and made sho’ of all de chances? I’se gone out in dat big forest, pretendin’ to hunt, so many times dat I knows it high an’ low like a book. I could go through on dem trails wid my eyes shut. (With great contempt) Think dese ign’rent bush niggers dat ain’t got brains enuff to know deir own names even can catch Brutus Jones? Huh, I s’pects not! Not on yo’ life! Why, man, de white men went after me wid blood-hounds where I come from an’ I jes’ laughs at ’em. It’s a shame to fool dese black trash around heah, dey’re so easy. You watch me, man. I’ll make dem look sick, I will. I’ll be ’cross de plain to de edge of de forest by time dark comes. Once in de woods in de night dey got a swell chance o’ findin’ dis baby! Dawn tomorrow I’ll be out at de oder side and on de coast whar dat French gunboat is stayin’. She picks me up, takes me to Martinique when she go dar, and dere I is safe wid a mighty big bank roll in my jeans. It’s easy as rollin’ off a log. Smithers (maliciously). But s’posin’ somethin’ ’appens wrong an’ they do nab yer? Jones (decisively). Dey don’t—dat’s de answer. Smithers. But, just for argyment’s sake—what’d you do? Jones (frowning). I’se got five lead bullets in dis gun good enuff fo’ common bush niggers—and after dat I got de silver bullet left to cheat ’em out o’ gittin’ me. Smithers (jeeringly). Ho, I was fergettin’ that silver bullet. You’ll bump yourself orf in style, won’t yer? Blimey! Jones (gloomily). You kin bet yo’ whole roll on one thing, white man. Dis baby plays out his string to de end and when he quits, he quits wid a bang de way he ought. Silver bullet ain’t none too good for him when he go, dat’s a fac’! (Then shaking off his nervousness—with a confident laugh) Sho’! What is I talkin’ about? Ain’t come to dat yit and I never will—not wid trash niggers like dese yere. (Boastfully) Silver bullet bring me luck anyway. I kin outguess, outrun, outfight, an’outplay de whole lot o’ dem all ovah de board any time o’ de day er night! You watch me! (From the distant hills comes the faint, steady thump of a tom-tom, low and vibrating. It starts at a rate exactly corresponding to normal pulse beat—72 to the minute—and continues at a gradually accelerating rate from this point uninter ruptedly to the very end of the play). jones (starts at the sound. A strange look of apprehension creeps into his face for a moment as he listens. Then he asks, with an at tempt to regain his most casual manner). What’s dat drum beatin’ fo’? Smithers (with a mean grin). For you. That means the bleedin’ ceremony ’as started. I’ve ’eard it before and I knows. Jones. Cer’mony? What cer’mony? Smithers. The blacks is ’oldin’ a bloody meetin’, ’avin’ a war dance, gettin’ their courage worked up b’fore they starts after you. Jones. Let dem! Dey’ll sho’ need it! Smithers. And they’re there ’oldin’ their ’eathen religious service—makin’ no end of devil spells and charms to ’elp ’em against yer silver bullet. (He guffaws loudly) Blimey, but they’re balmy as ’ell! Jones (a tiny bit awed and shaken in spite of himself). Huh! Takes more’n dat to scare dis chicken! Smithers (scenting the other’s feeling—maliciously). Ternight when it’s pitch black in the forest, they’ll ’ave their pet devils and ghosts ’oundin’ after you. You’ll find yer bloody ’air ’ll be standin’ on end before termorrow mornin’. (Seriously) It’s a bleedin’ queer place, that stinkin’ forest, even in daylight. Yer don’t know what might ’appen in there, it’s that rotten still. Always sends the cold shivers down my back minute I gets in it. Jones (with a contemptuous sniff). I ain’t no chicken liver like you is. Trees an’ me, we’se friends, and dar’s a full moon comin’ bring me light. And let dem po’ niggers make all de fool spells dey’se a min’ to. Does yo’ s’pect I’se silly enuff to b’lieve in ghosts an’ ha’nts an’ all dat ole woman’s talk? G’long, white man! You ain’t talkin’ to me. (With a chuckle) Doesn’t you know dey’s got to do wid a man was member in good standin’ o’ de Baptist Church? Sho’ I was dat when I was porter on de Pullmans, befo’ I gits into my little trouble. Let dem try deir heathen tricks. De Baptist Church done pertect me and land dem all in hell. (Then with more confident satisfaction) And I’se got little silver bullet o’ my own, don’t forgit! Smithers. Ho! You ’aven’t give much ’eed to your Baptist Church since you been down ’ere. I’ve ’eard myself you ’ad turned yer coat an’ was takin’ up with their blarsted witch doctors, or whatever the ’ell yer calls the swine. Jones (vehemently). I pretends to! Sho’ I pretends! Dat’s part o’ my game from de fust. If I finds out dem niggers believes dat black is white, den I yells it out louder ’n deir loudest. It don’t git me nothin’ to do missionary work for de Baptist Church. I’se after de coin, an’ I lays my Jesus on de shelf for de time bein’. (Stops abruptly to look at his watch—alertly) But