continue..
am of requires me to banish myself thence; Heaven, when it sent me into the world, never made me a soul compatible with the air of a court. I don’t find in myself the virtues necessary to succeed well, and make my fortune there. My chief talent is to be frank and sincere: I don’t know how to cajole people in conversation; and he who has not the gift of concealing his thoughts ought to make but a very short stay in that country. Out of a court, one has not that interest, doubtless, and those titles of honour, which it gives at present; but at the same time, in losing these advantages, one has not the vexation of acting very scurvy parts. One has not a thousand cruel rebuffs to suffer, one has not Mr. Such-a-one’s verses to praise, nor my Lady Such-a-one to flatter, nor to bear with the skull of a true marquis. Arsinoé. Let us drop this discourse of a court, since you are so pleased; but I must pity you in your amour, and that you may have my thoughts on that subject, I could heartily wish your affections were better placed: you deserve, without doubt, a much happier fate, and she whom you are charmed with is unworthy of you. Alcestes. But pray, madam, consider, when you say so, that this person is your friend. Arsinoé. Yes; but it really goes against my conscience to suffer any longer the wrong she does you; the situation I see you in gives me too sensible an affliction, and I give you notice that you are abused in your love. Alcestes. ’Tis discovering a great tenderness for me, madam, and such intelligence is obliging to a lover. Arsinoé. Yes, for all she is my friend, she is, and I say she is unworthy to enslave the heart of a man of honour, and that hers entertains no more than a dissembled kindness for you. Alcestes. That may be, madam, one cannot see through people’s hearts; but your charity might well have forborne throwing such a suspicion into mine. Arsinoé. If you won’t be undeceived, I shall e’en say no more to you, that’s easy enough. Alcestes. No, but on such a subject as this, whatever you expose us to, doubts are of all things the most tormenting: and for my part, I should be glad you would inform me of nothing but what you can plainly make appear to me. Arsinoé. Well, enough is said, and you are going to receive full light into this matter. Yes, I am willing your eyes should convince you of everything, only give me your hand as far as my house. There I shall let you see a faithful proof of the infidelity of your fair one’s heart: and if yours can be smitten with any other eyes, one may, perhaps, offer you something to give you consolation.