continue..
May it be anything that I can assist you in? Valere. Perhaps it may: we want to meet with some able man, some particular doctor, who might give some relief to our master’s daughter, that’s seized with a distemper which has quite and clean taken away the use of her tongue. A great many physicians have already spent all their art upon her; but one sometimes finds folks with wonderful secrets, certain peculiar remedies, which very often do what the others could not do, and ‘tis this we are looking for. Martina (aside). Ha! My stars have inspired me with an admirable invention to revenge myself on my rascal! (To them.) You could never have applied yourselves better to meet with what you want, for we have a man, the most marvellous man in all the world, for desperate distempers. Valere. How! Pray where can we find him. Martina. You’ll find him this moment towards that little place there, he diverts himself with cutting of wood. Lucas. A doctor cut wood! Valere. He diverts himself with gathering of simples you’d say? Martina. No. ’Tis an odd kind of a man who takes delight in it, a fantastical, fanciful, humoursome mortal, and one that you’d never take for what he is; he goes dressed in an extravagant manner, affects sometimes to appear ignorant, keeping his knowledge within him, and avoids nothing so much as exercising the marvellous talents which Heaven has given him for medicine. Valere. ’Tis a wonderful thing that all your great men have still something of caprice, some small grain of folly mixed with their learning. Martina. The folly of this man is greater than can be believed, for it sometimes goes so far that he’ll bear to be beat before he’ll acknowledge his capacity; and I give you notice that you’ll never gain your end, that he’ll never own he’s a doctor, if the whim is on him, unless you each take a cudgel and bring him by strength of blows to confess at last what at first he’ll conceal from you. ’Tis thus we treat him when we have occasion for him. Valere. Strange folly! Martina. ’Tis true. But after that you’ll see he’ll do miracles. Valere. What’s his name? Martina. His name is Sganarel; but he is easy to be known. ’Tis a man who has a large black beard, and who wears a ruff, with a yellow and green coat. Lucas. A yellow and green coat! He’s the doctor of paroquets then. Valere. But is it very true that he is so learned as you say? Martina. What? Why ’tis a man that does wonders. Six months ago a woman was given over by all the other physicians. They thought her dead for six hours, and prepared to bury her, when they brought the man we are speaking of, by force. Having seen her, he put a little drop of something into her mouth; and that very instant, she raised herself from her bed, and began immediately to walk about the room, as if nothing had been the matter. Lucas. Hah! Valere. This must have been some drop of drinkable gold. Martina. That might really be. ’Tis not three weeks ago that a young lad of twelve years old tumbled down from the top of a tower, and broke his head, arms, and legs, on the pavement. They had no sooner got our man to him but he rubbed his body all over with a certain ointment, which he makes, and the youth immediately raised himself on his feet, and ran to play at chuck. Lucas. Hah! Valere. This same man must have the universal medicine. Martina. Who doubts of it? Lucas. Ods bobs, this is just such a man as we want; let’s go quickly and search ’en out. Valere. We thank you for the favour you’ve done us. Martina. But remember well, however, the caution I have given you. Lucas. Hey! ’Zooks, let us alone. If he wants nothing but beating, the cow’s our own. Valere (To lucas ). We were mighty happy in meeting with this woman; I conceive the greatest hopes from it in the world. Title: SCENE VI Sganarel (comes on the stage, with a bottle in his hand, not seeing valere or lucas ). Tol de rol, lol dol dol. Valere. I hear somebody singing and cutting of wood. Sganarel. Tol, lol, dol—I’faith, I’ve worked enough to drink a sup. Let’s take a little breath. (He drinks.) This same wood is as salt as the devil. Poem ```( Sings. ) What pleasure’s so great, as the bottle can give, What music so sweet, as thy little gull, gull! My fate might be envied by all men that live, Were my dear jolly bottle but constantly full. Say why, my sweet bottle, I prithee, say why, Since, when full so delightful, you’ll ever be dry.``` Come, s’death, we must not breed melancholy. Valere (low to lucas). There’s the very man. Lucas (low to valere). I think you say true, and that I’se have found ’en out by my nose. Valere. Let’s see him nearer. Sganarel (hugging his bottle). Ah! my little rogue, how I do love thee, my little corksy! (Seeing valere and lucas looking at him, he lowers his voice.) My fate—might—be envied—by all men that live—What the deuce, who do these folks want? Valere. ’Tis he, most certainly. Lucas (to valere). He’s as like him that was defigured to us as if a had been spitten out of his mouth. sganarel sets down the bottle on the ground, and valere bowing to salute him, he thinking ’tis with a design to take it away, puts it on the other side. Upon which lucas doing the same thing, he takes it up again, and holds it close to his breast, with divers gestures, which make great dumb show. Sganarel (aside). They consult together, and look earnestly at me. What design can they have? Valere. Sir, is it not you who are called Sganarel? Sganarel. Hey! What? Valere. I ask you if it is not you whose name is Sganarel? Sganarel (turning towards valere, and then towards lucas). Yes, and no, according to what you would have with him. Valere. Nothing, but to do him all the civilities we could. Sganarel. In that case, ’tis me whose name’s Sganarel. Valere. Sir, we are transported to see you; we have been recommended to you for that we are searching after; and we come to beg your assistance, which we want. Sganarel. If ’tis anything, gentlemen, that depends upon my little employment, I am very ready to serve you. Valere. Sir, ’tis too great a favour that you do us: but be covered, pray, Sir, the sun may incommode you. Lucas. Cover your skull, zir. Sganarel (aside). These people are mighty full of ceremony. (Puts on his hat.) Valere. Sir, you must not think strange that we come to you. Skilful people are always sought for, and we are informed of your ability. Sganarel. ’Tis true, Sirs, that I am the first man in the world for making of faggots. Valere. Ah! Sir— Sganarel. I spare nothing in doing ’em, and make ’em after a manner that people have no reason to find fault with them. Valere. Sir, that’s not the thing in question. Sganarel. But then I fell ’em for nine and twopence a hundred. Valere. Pray don’t let us talk of that. Sganarel. I assure you I can’t let them go for less. Valere. Sir, we know how things are. Sganarel. If you know how things are, you know that I sell them so. Valere. Sir, this is jesting, but— Sganarel. I do not jest, I can’t bate anything of it. Valere. Let us talk after another manner, pray now. Sganarel. You may get them at another place for less, there are faggots and faggots: but for those that I make— Valere. Pray, Sir, let us leave this discourse. Sganarel. I swear to you that you shall not have them, if you fall short a farthing of it. Valere. Oh! fie. Sganarel. No, o’ my conscience, you shall pay that for ’em. I speak sincerely, and am not a man that would ask too much. Valere. Should such a person as you, Sir, amuse himself with these gross dissimulations, demean himself by talking in this manner; a man so learned, such a famous physician as you are, be willing to disguise himself from the eyes of the world, and keep buried the fine talents he enjoys? Sganarel (aside). The fellow’s a fool. Valere. Pray, Sir, don’t dissemble with us. Sganarel. What? Lucas. All this hodge-podge signifies nought; I do know what I do know. Sganarel. Well then, what would you say? Who do you take me for? Valere. For what you are, for a great doctor. Sganarel. Doctor yourself; I am not one, nor ever was. Valere (aside). This is the folly that possesses him. (Aloud.) Sir, don’t be