Work: The School for Scandal Field: school for scandal Author: Richard Sheridan Title: ACT IV Title: SCENE I—Picture-room atCHARLES’ Enter charles surface, sir oliver surface, moses, and careless. Charles Surface. Walk in, gentlemen, pray walk in!—here they are, the family of the Surfaces, up to the Conquest. Sir Oliver. And, in my opinion, a goodly collection. Charles Surface. Aye, aye, these are done in true spirit of portrait-painting—no volunteer grace or expression—not like the works of your modern Raphael, who gives you the strongest resemblance, yet contrives to make your own portrait independent of you; so that you may sink the original and not hurt the picture. No, no; the merit of these is the inveterate likeness—all stiff and awkward as the originals, and like nothing in human nature beside! Sir Oliver. Ah! We shall never see such figures of men again. Charles Surface. I hope not. Well, you see, Master Premium, what a domestic character I am—here I sit of an evening surrounded by my family. But come, get to your pulpit, Mr. Auctioneer—here’s an old gouty chair of my grandfather’s will answer the purpose. Careless. Aye, aye, this will do. But, Charles, I have ne’er a hammer; and what’s an auctioneer without his hammer? Charles Surface. Egad, that’s true. What parchment have we here? (Takes down a roll.) Richard, heir to Thomas—our genealogy in full. Here, Careless, you shall have no common bit of mahogany— here’s the family tree for you, you rogue—this shall be your hammer, and now you may knock down my ancestors with their own pedigree. Sir Oliver (aside). What an unnatural rogue!—an ex post facto parricide! Careless. Yes, yes, here’s a list of your generation indeed; faith, Charles, this is the most convenient thing you could have found for the business, for ’twill serve not only as a hammer, but a catalogue into the bargain. But come, begin—A-going, a-going, a-going! Charles Surface. Bravo, Careless! Well, here’s my great uncle, Sir Richard Raviline, a marvellous good general in his day, I assure you. He served in all the Duke of Marlborough’s wars, and got that cut over his eye at the battle of Malplaquet. What say you, Mr. Premium? look at him—there’s a hero for you! not cut out of his feathers, as your modern clipped captains are, but enveloped in wig and regimentals, as a general should be. What do you bid? Moses. Mr. Premium would have you speak. Charles Surface. Why, then, he shall have him for ten pounds, and I am sure that’s not dear for a staff officer. Sir Oliver. Heaven deliver me! his famous uncle Richard for ten pounds! (Aside.)—Very well, sir, I take him at that. Charles Surface. Careless, knock down my uncle Richard.—Here, now, is a maiden sister of his, my great-aunt Deborah, done by Kneller, thought to be in his best manner, and a very formidable likeness. There she is, you see, a shepherdess feeding her flock. You shall have her for five pounds ten—the sheep are worth the money. Sir Oliver. Ah! poor Deborah! a woman who set such a value on herself! (Aside.)—Five pound ten—she’s mine. Charles Surface. Knock down my aunt Deborah! Here, now, are two that were a sort of cousins of theirs.—You see, Moses, these pictures were done some time ago, when beaux wore wigs, and the ladies wore their own hair. Sir Oliver. Yes, truly, head-dresses appear to have been a little lower in those days. Charles Surface. Well, take that couple for the same. Moses. ’Tis a good bargain. Charles Surface. Careless!—This, now, is a grandfather of my mother’s, a learned judge, well known on the western circuit.—What do you rate him at, Moses? Moses. Four guineas. Charles Surface. Four guineas! Gad’s life, you don’t bid me the price of his wig.—Mr. Premium, you have more respect for the woolsack; do let us knock his lordship down at fifteen. Sir Oliver. By all means. Careless. Gone! Charles Surface. And there are two brothers of his, William and Walter Blunt, Esquires, both members of Parliament, and noted speakers; and, what’s very extraordinary, I believe that is the first time they were ever bought and sold. Sir Oliver. That’s very extraordinary, indeed! I’ll take them at your own price, for the honour of Parliament. Careless. Well said, little Premium! I’ll knock ’em down at forty. Charles Surface. Here’s a jolly fellow—I don’t know what relation, but he was mayor of Manchester; take him at eight pounds. Sir Oliver. No, no—six will do for the mayor. Charles Surface. Come, make it guineas, and I’ll throw you the two aldermen there into the bargain. Sir Oliver. They’re mine. Charles Surface. Careless, knock down the mayor and aldermen. But, plague on’t! we shall be all day retailing in this manner; do let us deal wholesale—what say you, little Premium? Give me three hundred pounds for the rest of the family in the lump. Careless. Aye, aye, that will be the best way. Sir Oliver. Well, well, anything to accommodate you; they are mine. But there is one portrait which you have always passed over. Careless. What, that ill-looking little fellow over the settee? Sir Oliver. Yes, sir, I mean that; though I don’t think him so ill-looking a little fellow, by any means. Charles Surface. What, that? Oh, that’s my uncle Oliver! ’Twas done before he went to India. Careless. Your uncle Oliver! Gad, then you’ll never be friends, Charles. That, now, to me, is as stern a looking rogue as ever I saw—an unforgiving eye, and a damned disinheriting countenance! an inveterate knave, depend on’t. Don’t you think so, little Premium? Sir Oliver. Upon my soul, sir, I do not; I think it is as honest a looking face as any in the room, dead or alive. But I suppose your uncle Oliver goes with the rest of the lumber? Charles Surface. No, hang it! I’ll not part with poor Noll. The old fellow has been very good to me, and egad, I’ll keep his picture while I’ve a room to put it in. Sir Oliver. The rogue’s my nephew after all! (Aside.)—But, sir, I have somehow taken a fancy to that picture. Charles Surface. I’m sorry for’t, for you certainly will not have it. Oons! haven’t you got enough of ’em? Sir Oliver. I forgive him everything! (Aside.)—But, sir, when I take a whim in my head, I don’t value money. I’ll give you as much for that as for all the rest. Charles Surface. Don’t tease me, master broker; I tell you I’ll not part with it, and there’s an end on’t. Sir Oliver. How like his father the dog is!—(Aloud.) Well, well, I have done. I did not perceive it before, but I think I never saw such a resemblance. Well, sir—here is a draught for your sum. Charles Surface. Why, ’tis for eight hundred pounds! Sir Oliver. You will not let Sir Oliver go? Charles Surface. Zounds! no! I tell you, once more. Sir Oliver. Then never mind the difference; we’ll balance another time. But give me your hand on the bargain; you are an honest fellow, Charles—I beg pardon, sir, for being so free.—Come, Moses. Charles Surface. Egad, this is a whimsical old fellow!—but hark’ee, Premium, you’ll prepare lodgings for these gentlemen. Sir Oliver. Yes, yes, I’ll send for them in a day or two. Charles Surface. But hold—do now—send a genteel conveyance for them, for, I assure you, they were most of them used to ride in their own carriages. Sir Oliver. I will, I will, for all but—Oliver. Charles Surface. Aye, all but the little honest nabob. Sir Oliver. You’re fixed on that? Charles Surface. Peremptorily. Sir Oliver. A dear extravagant rogue! (Aside.)—Good day!—Come, Moses.—Let me hear now who dares call him profligate! (Exeunt sir oliver and moses.) Careless. Why, this is the oddest genius of the sort I ever saw! Charles Surface. Egad, he’s the prince of brokers, I think. I wonder how the devil Moses got acquainted with so honest a fellow.—Ha! here’s Rowley.—Do, Careless, say I’ll join the company in a moment. Careless. I will—but don’t let that old blockhead persuade you to squander any of that money on old musty debts, or any such nonsense; for tradesmen, Charles, are the most exorbitant fellows! Charles Surface. Very true, and paying them is only encouraging them. Careless. Nothing else. Charles Surface. Aye, aye, never fear. (Exit careless.) So! this was an odd old fellow, indeed! Let me see, two-thirds of this is mine by right—five hundred and thirty pounds. ’Fore heaven! I find one’s ancestors are more valuable relations than I took ’em for!—Ladies and gentlemen, your most obedient and very grateful humble servant. Enter rowley. Ha! old Rowley! egad, you are just come in time to take leave of your old acquaintance. Rowley. Yes, I heard they were going. But I wonder you can have such spirits under so many distresses. Charles Surface. Why, there’s the point—my distresses are so many, that I can’t