continue..
done. Sganarel. ’Tis the office of a doctor to inspect into the nipples of nurses. Lucas. Be’t your office how ’twill, I’m your zarvant for that. Sganarel. Hast thou really the impudence to contradict a physician? Out there. Lucas. I’se laugh at that. Sganarel (looking askew at him). I’ll give thee a fever. Jacqueline (taking lucas by the arm, and whisking him round). Get thee gone hence; am not I big enough to defend myself if he does anything to me that he should not do? Lucas. I won’t have him meddle with thee. Sganarel. Fie on the rascal, he’s jealous of his wife. Géronte. Here’s my daughter. Title: SCENE VI Sganarel. Is this the sick person? Géronte. Yes, I’ve no daughter but she, and I should be in the utmost grief were she to die. Sganarel. Let her take great care of that; she must not die without the doctor’s order. Géronte. A chair, here. Sganarel (sits between géronte: and lucinda). This is a patient who is not so very distasteful, and I hold that a man in good health might make a shift well enough with her. Géronte. You have made her laugh, Sir. Sganarel. So much the better, when the doctor makes the patient laugh, ’tis the best symptom in the world. (To lucinda.) Well, what’s the case? What ails you? What’s the disorder you feel? Lucinda (putting her hand to her mouth, head, and under her chin). Han, hi, hon, han. Sganarel. Hey! what d’e say? Lucinda (continuing the same motions). Han, hi, hon, han, han, hi, hon. Sganarel. What? Lucinda. Han, hi, hon. Sganarel. Han, hi, hon, han, ha. I don’t understand you. What the deuce of a language is this? Géronte. That’s her distemper, Sir. She’s become dumb, and we have not yet been able to find out the cause of it; which accident has occasioned her marriage to be retarded. Sganarel. Why so? Géronte. He whom she was to marry would wait till she was cured before he’d bring things to a conclusion. Sganarel. And who is this sot who would not have his wife dumb? Would to Heaven that mine had the same disease! I should take sufficient care not to have her cured. Géronte. In short, Sir, we must entreat you to employ your utmost application to alleviate her illness. Sganarel. Oh! don’t put yourself in pain about it. But tell me a little; does this illness oppress her very much? Géronte. Yes, Sir. Sganarel. So much the better. Does she feel any great pains? Géronte. Very great. Sganarel. That’s mighty well. Does she go you know where? Géronte. Yes. Sganarel. Plentifully? Géronte. I know nothing of that. Sganarel. Is the discharge laudable? Géronte. I’m not skilled in those things. Sganarel (to lucinda). Give me your arm. (To géronte.) Here’s a pulse which denotes that your daughter is dumb. Géronte. Why truly, Sir, that’s her disease, you have found it out all at the first touch. Sganarel. Ay, ay! Jacqueline. Do but zee how a has divoined her ailment. Sganarel. We great doctors know things instantly. An ignorant fellow would have been puzzled, and would have told you ’tis this, and ’tis that; but for my part, I hit the nail on the head, the very first stroke, and acquaint you that your daughter is dumb. Géronte. Yes; but I should be glad that you could tell from whence that came. Sganarel. There’s nothing more easy. It came from hence that she has lost her speech. Géronte. Very good; but the cause, pray, which made her lose her speech? Sganarel. All our best authors will inform you that ’tis an impediment in the action of her tongue. Géronte. But your sentiments, moreover, upon this impediment in the action of the tongue. Sganarel. Aristotle says upon it—mighty fine things. Géronte. I believe it. Sganarel. Ah! that same was a great man. Géronte. No doubt. Sganarel. A mighty great man: a man that was greater (holding out his arm from his elbow) than me by all this. But to return to our reasoning. I hold that this impediment in the action of her tongue is caused by certain humours, which amongst us scholars are called peccant humours; peccant, that’s to say—peccant humours; so that the vapours formed by the exhalations of influences which rise in the region of diseases, coming—as we may say—to—Do you understand Latin? Géronte. Not in the least. Sganarel (getting up hastily). You don’t understand Latin! Géronte. No. Sganarel (making divers diverting postures). Cabricias arci thuram, catalamus, singulariter, nominativo, hæc musa, the muse, Bonus, bona, bonum, Deus sanctus, est ne oratio Latinas? etiam, yes. Quare, wherefore? quia substantivo, and adjectivum, concordat in generi, numerum, and casus. Géronte. Ah! wherefore did not I study! Jacqueline. What a learned man is this! Lucas. Yes, this is so vine, that I doan’t understond a sillable of’t. Sganarel. For these vapours that I speak to you of, passing from the left side, where the liver is, to the right side, where the heart is, finds that the lungs, which we call in Latin Armyan, having communication with the brain, which in Greek we name Nasmus, by means of the hollow vein, which in Hebrew we call Cubile, meets in its way the said vapours, which fill the ventricles of the omoplate: and because the said vapours—comprehend this reasoning well, I pray you—and because the said vapours have a certain malignity—attend well to this, I conjure you. Géronte. Yes. Sganarel. Have a certain malignity which is caused—be attentive, if you please. Géronte. I am so. Sganarel. Which is caused by the acrimony of the humours engendered in the concavity of the diaphragm, it comes to pass that these vapours—Ossabandus, nequeis, nequer, potarium, quipsa milus. That’s exactly the cause of your daughter’s being dumb. Jacqueline. Ah! that’s foinly zaid, our mon! Lucas. Why ha’ not I a tongue so well hanged? Géronte. Nobody could reason better undoubtedly. There’s but one thing in it which stuck in my stomach; and that’s the place of the liver and heart. I apprehend that you place them otherwise than they are: that the heart is on the left side, and the liver on the right side. Sganarel. Yes, it was formerly so; but we have altered all that, and we now practise medicine after quite a new method. Géronte. That’s what I did not know, and I ask your pardon for my ignorance. Sganarel. There’s no harm. You are not obliged to be as learned as us. Géronte. True: but Sir, what think you must be done with this disease? Sganarel. What do I think must be done? Géronte. Yes. Sganarel. My advice is that they put her to bed; and that they make her take for a remedy a quantity of bread soaked in wine. Géronte. Wherefore that, Sir? Sganarel. Because that in bread and wine mixed together, there’s a sympathetic virtue, which occasions talking. Don’t you plainly see that they give no other thing to parrots, and that by eating this they learn to talk? Géronte. That’s true. Oh! the great man! Quickly, a quantity of bread and wine. Sganarel. I’ll return in the evening to see what condition she’ll be in. Title: SCENE VII Sganarel. (to jacqueline). Softly, you. (To géronte.) Sir, here’s a nurse, for whom I must make up some few remedies. Jacqueline. Who, I? I ha’ the best health in the world. Sganarel. So much the worse, Nurse, so much the worse. This high health is to be feared; and it won’t be amiss to give you a little gentle bleeding, and administer a little dulcifying clyster. Géronte. But, Sir, this is a method which I don’t comprehend. Why let her blood when she has no illness? Sganarel. No matter, the method is salutary; and as one drinks for thirst to come, one must likewise bleed for illness to come. Jacqueline (going). Trath, I laugh at that; I’ll not make a poticary’s shop o’ my carcass. Sganarel. You are averse to physic; but we can make you subject to reason. Title: SCENE VIII Sganarel. I give you good morrow, Sir. Géronte. Stay a little, if you please. Sganarel. What would you do? Géronte. Give you a fee, Sir. Sganarel (reaching out his hand behind him, while géronte opens his purse). I won’t take it, Sir. Géronte. Sir. Sganarel. No. Géronte. Stay one moment. Sganarel. By no means. Géronte. Pray now. Sganarel. You mistake. Géronte. ’Tis done presently. Sganarel. I won’t do it. Géronte. Hey! Sganarel. ’Tis not money that induces me to practise. Géronte. I believe it. Sganarel (after having taken the money). Is this weight? Géronte. Yes, Sir. Sganarel. I am not a mercenary physician. Géronte. I know it well. Sganarel. Interest does not govern me. Géronte. I have not that thought. Sganarel (alone, looking on the money he had received). I’ faith this does not go ill, and provided that— Title: SCENE IX Leander. Sir, I have waited for you a long