Work: Scientific Study of the So-called Physical Processes in the Higher Animals Field: scientific study of the so-called physical processes in the higher animals Author: Ivan Petrovich Pavlov The subject of today’s address, delivered in honor of Thomas Huxley, an eminent representative of natural science and a most energetic champion of that greatest biological principle (the doctrine of evolution), is the naturalistic investigation of the psychical processes in the higher animal. I shall begin with an actual case which occurred in my laboratory a few years ago. Among my collaborators was a young doctor with an active mind capable of appreciating the joys and triumphs of investigation. Great was my astonishment when this loyal friend of science became profoundly disturbed on hearing of our plans to investigate the psychical activity of the dog in that same laboratory and by the same means which we had been using for the solution of physiological questions. All of our arguments were ineffective; he prophesied and hoped for only failure. The cause of this, as far as we could understand, was his idea that the psychical life of man and that of the higher animals was so individual and exalted that it not only did not lend itself to investigation, but would even be sullied by our rude physiological methods. Although this, gentlemen, may have been a somewhat exaggerated example, I believe it is characteristic and typical. In dealing with the highest vital phenomena, the fact must not be overlooked that a systematic appreciation of natural science to the last limits of life will not be able to avoid misconception and opposition from those who are accustomed to regard these phenomena from another point of view and are convinced that this point of view is unassailable. This is why I feel it obligatory first to explain exactly and clearly my point of view concerning the psychical activities of the higher animals, and secondly to pass from the preliminaries to the subject itself as soon as possible. I have referred intentionally to psychical activities as “so-called.” If the naturalist hopes to make a complete analysis of the activity of the higher animals, he has not the right to speak of the psychical processes of these animals, and he can not so speak without deserting the principles of natural science. This is natural science—the work of the human mind applied to nature, and the investigation of nature without any kind of assumption or explanation from sources other than nature itself. Were the investigator to speak of the psychical faculties of the higher animals, he would be transferring ideas from his own inner world to nature, repeating the procedure of his predecessors who were accustomed, on observing nature, to apply to its inanimate phenomena their own thoughts, wishes and sensations. The naturalist must consider only one thing: what is the relation of this or that external reaction of the animal to the phenomena of the external world? This response may be extremely complicated in comparison with the reactions of lower animals, and infinitely complicated in comparison with the reaction of any inanimate object, but the principle involved remains the same. Strictly speaking, natural science is under obligation to determine only the precise connection which exists between a given natural phenomenon and the response of the living organism to that phenomenon, or, in other words, to ascertain completely how a living being maintains itself in constant equilibrium with its environment. This assertion can hardly be contested, and is further supported by the fact that it receives daily more and more general acceptance in the investigation of the lower and intermediate stages of the zoological scale. The question is simply whether this rule is already applicable to the examination of the higher functions of the higher vertebrates. A serious endeavor to institute inquiries in that direction is, as it appears to me, the only reasonable answer to the question. I and my many collaborators began this work some years ago and we have recently devoted ourselves to it almost exclusively. I would now ask your attention to an account, first, of the most important results of this inquiry, which seem to me to be very instructive; and secondly, to an account of the inferences which may be drawn from it. Our experiments have been performed exclusively on the dog, in which the particular reaction used was an unimportant physiologic process—the secretion of saliva. The experimenter was always working with a perfectly normal animal; i.e., an animal which was not subjected to abnormal influences during the experiment. Exact observations on the work of the salivary glands could be made at any moment by means of a simple method. Saliva flows, as we all know, when something is given the dog to eat or is introduced forcibly into his mouth. Both the quality and the quantity of the saliva, under these conditions, is strictly dependent upon the quality and quantity of the substances brought into the dog’s mouth. In this well-known physiological process we have before us a reflex. The idea of reflex action as a special elementary function of the nervous system is an old and established truism of physiology. It is the reaction of the organism to the external world, effected through the nervous system, by which an external stimulus is transformed into a nervous process and transmitted along a circuitous route (from the peripheral endings of the centripetal nerve, along its fibers to the apparatus of the central nervous system, and out along the centrifugal path until, reaching one or another organ, it excites its activity). This reaction is specific and permanent. Its specificity is a manifestation of a close and peculiar relation of the external phenomenon to the physiological action, and is founded on the specific sensibility of the peripheral nerve endings in the given nervous chain. These specific reflex actions in normal life, or to state it much more accurately, in the absence of abnormal vital conditions, are constant and unchanging. The responses of the salivary glands to external influences are, however, not limited by the above-mentioned ordinary reflex actions. We all know that the salivary glands begin to secrete not only when the stimulus of appropriate substances is impressed on the interior surface of the mouth but that they also often begin to secrete when other receptive surfaces, including the eye and the ear, are stimulated. The actions last mentioned are, however, generally considered apart from physiology and receive the name of psychical stimuli. We shall take another course, and shall endeavor to restore to physiology what properly belongs to it. These exceptional manifestations unquestionably have much in common with ordinary reflex action. Every time that such a flow of saliva begins it is attributable to the occurrence of some special stimulus among the external influences that may be recognized. On very careful exercise of his attention the observer perceives that the number of spontaneous flows of saliva forms a rapidly diminishing series, and it is in the highest degree probable that those extremely infrequent flows of saliva, for which no particular cause is at first sight apparent, are, in reality, the result of some stimulus invisible to the eye of the observer. From this it follows that the centripetal paths are always stimulated primarily, and the centrifugal paths secondarily, with the interposition, of course, of the central nervous system. Now these are actually all the elements of a reflex action, the only missing points being exact data as to the operation of the stimulus in the central nervous system. Are we familiar with this last mechanism in the ordinary reflexes? Speaking generally, then, our phenomena are reflexes, but the difference between these newly recognized reflexes and the long-known ones is certainly immense, for they have been assigned to quite different departments of science. Physiology has, therefore, before it the problem of evaluating this difference experimentally, and of establishing the essential properties of the reflexes which have been newly recognized. In the first place they arise from all the body surfaces which are sensitive to stimulation, even from such regions as the eye and the ear, from which an ordinary reflex action affecting the salivary glands is never known to proceed. It must be mentioned that usual salivary reflexes may originate not only from the cavity of the mouth but also from the skin and the nasal cavity; the skin, however, produces this effect only when it is subjected to some destructive process such as cutting or erosion by caustics, while the nasal cavity produces this effect only through the contact of vapors or gases, such as ammonia, which cause local irritation, but never through the agency of usual odors. In the second place, a conspicuous feature of these reflexes is that they are in the highest degree inconstant. All stimuli applied to the mouth of the dog unfailingly give a positive result with reference to the secretion of saliva, but the same objects when presented to the eye, the ear, etc., may sometimes be