continue..
make him do anything, but only to make him look at it, straight in the eye—look at it, and, though doing nothing, suffer beyond words. And, while attempting to escape from this state of things, Ivan Ilyitch sought relief, sought other shelter; and other aids came along, and for a short time seemed to help him; but immediately they not so much failed, as grew transparent, as if it became visible through all, and nothing could hide it. It happened in this latter part of the time that he went into the drawing room which he had decorated—that very drawing room where he had met with the fall, for which he—as he had to think with bitterness and scorn—for the decoration of which he had sacrificed his life; because he knew that his malady began with that bruise: he went in, and saw that on the varnished table was a scratch, cut by something. He sought for the cause of it, and found it in the bronze decoration of an album, which was turned up at the edge. He took the precious album, lovingly filled by him, and broke out in a passion against the carelessness of his daughter and her friends, who destroyed things so, who dog-eared photographs. He put this carefully to rights, and bent back the ornament. Then the idea occurred to him to transfer this établissement, albums and all, to the other corner, where the flowers were. He summoned a servant. Either his wife or his daughter came to his help; they did not agree with him; they argued against the change: he argued, he lost his temper; but everything was good, because he did not think about it, it did not appear. But here, as he himself was beginning to shift the things, his wife said: “Hold on! the men will attend to that; you will strain yourself again.” And suddenly it gleamed through the shelter; he saw it. It gleamed; he was already hoping that it had disappeared, but involuntarily he watched for the pain in his side—there it was, all the time, always making its advance; and he could not forget it, and it clearly gazed at him from among the flowers. What was the purpose of it all? “And it is true that here I have lost my life on that curtain as in a charge! Is it possible? How horrible and how ridiculous! It cannot be! It cannot be! but it is.” He went back to his library, went to bed, and found himself again alone with it. Face to face with it. But to do anything with it—impossible! Only to look at it, and grow chill! How it came about in the third month of Ivan Ilyitch’s illness, it was impossible to say, because it came about step by step, imperceptibly; but it came about that his wife and daughter, and his son and the servants, and his acquaintances and the doctors, and chiefly he himself, knew that all the interest felt in him by others was concentrated in this one thing—how soon he would vacate his place, would free the living from the constraint caused by his presence, and be himself freed from his sufferings. He slept less and less; they gave him opium, and began to try hypodermic injections of morphine. But this did not relieve him. The dull distress which he experienced in his half-drowsy condition at first merely afforded the relief of change; but soon it came back as severe as ever, or even more intense than open pain. They prepared for him special dishes, according to the direction of the physicians; but these dishes became ever more and more tasteless, more and more repugnant to him. Special arrangements also had been made, so that he might perform the wants of nature; and each time it became more trying for him. The torture came from the uncleanliness, the indecency, of it, and the ill odor, from the knowledge that he required the assistance of another. But from this very same disagreeable circumstance Ivan Ilyitch drew a consolation. His butler, the muzhik Gerasim, always came to set things to rights. Gerasim was a clean, ruddy young muzhik, who had grown stout in waiting on the table in the city houses. He was always festive, always serene. From the very first, the sight of this man, always so neatly attired in his Russian costume, engaged in this repulsive task, made Ivan Ilyitch ashamed. One time, after he had got up and was feeling too weak to lift his pantaloons, he threw himself into an easy chair and was contemplating with horror his bare thighs with their strangely flabby muscles standing out. Gerasim came in with light, buoyant steps, in thick boots, diffusing an agreeable odor of tar from his boots, and the freshness of the winter air. He wore a clean hempen apron and a clean cotton shirt, with the cuffs rolled up on his bare, strong young arms; and, not looking at Ivan Ilyitch, evidently curbing the joy in life which shone in his face, so as not to offend the sick man, he began to do his work. “Gerasim,” said Ivan Ilyitch, in a weak voice. Gerasim started, evidently fearing that he had failed in some duty, and turned toward the sick man his fresh, good, simple young face, on which the beard was only just beginning to sprout. “What can I do for you?” “This, I am thinking, is disagreeable to you. Forgive me. I cannot help it.” “Do not mention it.” And Gerasim’s eyes shone, and he showed his white young teeth. “Why should I not do you this service? It is for a sick man.” And with expert, strong hands, he fulfilled his wonted task and went out with light steps. After five minutes he returned, still walking with light steps. He had made everything clean and sweet. Ivan Ilyitch was still sitting in his arm chair. “Gerasim,” he said, “be good enough to assist me. Come here.” Gerasim went to him. “Lift me up. It is hard for me alone, and I sent Dmitri away.” Gerasim went to him. In just the same way as he walked, he lifted him with his strong arm, deftly, gently, and held him. With his other hand he adjusted his clothing, and then was about to let him sit down. But Ivan Ilyitch requested him to help him to the divan. Gerasim, without effort, and exercising no sensible pressure, supported him, almost carrying him, to the divan, and set him down. “Thank you. How easily, how well, you do it all!” Gerasim again smiled, and was about to go. But Ivan Ilyitch felt so good with him, that he wanted him to stay. “Wait! Please bring me that chair…no; that one there. Put it under my feet. It is easier for me when my feet are raised.” Gerasim brought the chair, put it down noiselessly, arranged so that it sat even on the floor, and put Ivan Ilyitch’s legs on the chair. It seemed to Ivan Ilyitch that he felt more comfortable while Gerasim was holding up his legs. “It is better when my legs are up,” said Ivan Ilyitch. “Bring me that cushion.” Gerasim did this. Again he lifted his legs, and arranged it all. Again Ivan Ilyitch felt better while Gerasim was holding his legs. When he put them down, he felt worse. “Gerasim,” said he, “are you busy just now?” “Not at all,” said Gerasim, having learned of city people how to speak with gentlefolk. “What more have you to do?” “What more have I to do? Everything has been done, except splitting wood against tomorrow.” “Then, hold my legs a little higher, can you?” “Why not? Of course I can!” Gerasim lifted his legs higher, and it seemed to Ivan Ilyitch that in this position he felt no pain at all. “But how about the wood?” “Don’t be worried about that. We shall have time enough.” Ivan Ilyitch bade Gerasim to sit down and hold his legs, and he talked with him. And, strangely enough, it seemed to him that he felt better while Gerasim was holding his legs. From that time forth Ivan Ilyitch would sometimes call Gerasim, and make him hold his legs on his shoulders, and he liked to talk with him. Gerasim did this easily, willingly, simply, and with a goodness of heart which touched Ivan Ilyitch. In all other people, good health, strength, and vigorous life affronted Ivan Ilyitch; but Gerasim’s strength and vigorous life did not affront Ivan Ilyitch, but calmed him. Ivan Ilyitch’s chief torment was a lie—the lie somehow accepted by everyone, that he was only sick, but not dying, and that he needed only to be calm, and trust to the doctors, and then somehow he would come out all right. But he knew that, whatever was done, nothing would come of it, except still more excruciating anguish and death. And this lie