Work: The Death of Ivan Ilyitch Field: death of ivan ilyitch Author: Leo Tolstoy In the great building of the law courts, while the proceedings in the Mielvinsky suit were at a standstill, the members of the board and the prokuror met in Ivan Yegorovitch Shebek’s private room, and the conversation turned on the famous Krasovsky suit. Feodor Vasilyevitch talked himself into a passion in pointing out the men’s innocence; Ivan Yegorovitch maintained his side; but Piotr Ivanovitch, who had not entered into the discussion at first, took no part in it even now, and was glancing over the Vyedomosti, which had just been handed to him. “Gentlemen!” said he, “Ivan Ilyitch is dead!” “Is it possible?” “Here! read for yourself,” said he to Feodor Vasilyevitch, handing him the paper, which had still retained its odor of freshness. Heavy black lines enclosed these printed words: Praskovia Feodorovna Golovina, with heartfelt sorrow, announces to relatives and friends the death of her beloved husband, Ivan Ilyitch Golovin, member of the Court of Appeal, who departed this life on the 16th February, 1882. The funeral will take place on Friday, at one o’clock in the afternoon. Ivan Ilyitch had been the colleague of the gentlemen there assembled, and all liked him. He had been ill for several weeks, and it was said that his case was incurable. His place was kept vacant for him; but it had been decided that, in case of his death, Alekseyef might be assigned to his place, while either Vinnikof or Schtabel would take Alekseyef s place. And so, on hearing of Ivan Ilyitch’s death, the first thought of each of the gentlemen gathered in that room was in regard to the changes and promotions which this death might bring about among the members of the council and their acquaintances. “Now, surely, I shall get either Schtabel’s or Vinnikof’s place,” was Feodor Vasilyevitch’s thought. “It has been promised me for a long time; and this promotion will mean an increase in my salary of eight hundred rubles, besides allowances.” “I must propose right away to have my brother-in-law transferred from Kaluga,” thought Piotr Ivanovitch. “My wife will be very glad. Then it will be impossible for her to say that I have never done anything for her relations.” “I have been thinking that he wouldn’t get up again,” said Piotr Ivanovitch aloud. “It is too bad.” “But what was really the matter with him?” “The doctors could not determine. That is to say, they determined it, but each in his own way. When I saw him the last time, it seemed to me that he was getting better.” “But I haven’t been to see him since the Christmas holidays. I kept meaning to go.” “Did he have any property?” “His wife had a very little, I think. But a mere pittance.” “Well, we must go to see her. They live a frightful distance off.” “That is, from you. Everything is far from you!” “Now, see here! He can’t forgive me because I live on the other side of the river,” said Piotr Ivanovitch to Shebek, with a smile. And then they talked about the long distances in cities, till the recess was over. Over and above the considerations caused by the death of this man, in regard to the mutations and possible changes in the court that might result from it, the very fact of the death of an intimate friend aroused as usual in all who heard about it a feeling of pleasure that “it was he, and not I, who was dead.” Each one said to himself, or felt: “Well, he is dead, and I am not.” The intimate acquaintances, the so-called friends, of Ivan Ilyitch could not help having these thoughts, and also felt that now it was incumbent on them to fulfill the very melancholy obligation of propriety, in going to the funeral and paying a visit of condolence to the widow. Feodor Vasilyevitch and Piotr Ivanovitch had been more intimate with him than the others. Piotr Ivanovitch had been his fellow in the law school, and had felt under obligations to Ivan Ilyitch. Having, at dinnertime, informed his wife of Ivan Ilyitch’s death, and his reflections as to the possibility of his brother-in-law’s transfer into their circle, Piotr Ivanovitch, not stopping to rest, put on his dress coat, and drove off to Ivan Ilyitch’s. At the door of Ivan Ilyitch’s residence stood a carriage and two izvozchiks. At the foot of the stairs, in the hallway by the hat rack, pushed back against the wall, was the brocaded coffin cover, with tassels and lace full of purified powdered camphor. Two ladies in black were taking off their shubkas. One whom he knew was Ivan Ilyitch’s sister; the other lady he did not know. Piotr Ivanovitch’s colleague, Schwartz, was just coming downstairs; and, as he recognized the newcomer, he stopped on the upper step, and winked at him as much as to say: “Ivan Ilyitch was a bad manager; you and I understand a thing or two.” Schwartz’s face, with its English side whiskers, and his spare figure under his dress coat, had, as always, an elegant solemnity; and this solemnity, which was forever contradicted by Schwartz’s jovial nature, here had a peculiar piquancy, so Piotr Ivanovitch thought. Piotr Ivanovitch gave precedence to the ladies, and slowly followed them upstairs. Schwartz did not make any move to descend, but waited at the landing. Piotr Ivanovitch understood his motive; without doubt, he wanted to make an appointment for playing cards that evening. The ladies mounted the stairs to the widow’s room; and Schwartz, with lips gravely compressed and firm, and with mischievous eyes, indicated to Piotr Ivanovitch, by the motion of his brows, the room at the right, where the dead man was. Piotr Ivanovitch entered, having that feeling of uncertainty, ever present under such circumstances, as to what would be the proper thing to do. But he knew that in such circumstances the sign of the cross never came amiss. As to whether he ought to make a salutation or not, he was not quite sure; and he therefore took a middle course. As he went into the room, he began to cross himself, and, at the same time, he made an almost imperceptible inclination. As far as he was permitted by the motion of his hands and head, he took in the appearance of the room. Two young men, apparently nephews—one, a scholar at the gymnasium—were just leaving the room, making the sign of the cross. An old woman was standing motionless; and a lady, with strangely arched eyebrows, was saying something to her in a whisper. A hearty-looking, energetic sacristan in a frock was reading something in a loud voice, with an expression which forbade all objection. The muzhik, Gerasim, who acted as butler, was sprinkling something on the floor, passing slowly in front of Piotr Ivano vitch. As he saw this, Piotr Ivanovitch immediately became cognizant of a slight odor of decomposition. Piotr Ivanovitch, at his last call on Ivan Ilyitch, had seen this muzhik in the library. He was performing the duties of nurse, and Ivan Ilyitch was extremely fond of him. Piotr Ivanovitch kept crossing himself, and bowing impartially toward the corpse, the sacristan, and the icons that stood on a table in the corner. Then, when it seemed to him that he had already continued too long making signs of the cross with his hand, he stopped short, and began to gaze at the dead man. The dead man lay in the drapery of the coffin, as dead men always lie, a perfectly lifeless weight, absolutely unconscious, with stiffened limbs, with head forever at rest on the pillow; and showing, as all corpses show, a brow like yellow wax, with spots on the sunken temples, and a nose so prominent as almost to press down on the upper lip. He had greatly changed, and was far more emaciated than when Piotr Ivanovitch had last seen him; but, as in the case of all the dead, his face was more beautiful, especially more dignified, than it had been when he was alive. On his face was an expression signifying that what was necessary to do, that had been done, and had been done in due form. Besides this, there was in his expression a reproach or warning to the living. This warning seemed ill-judged to Piotr Ivanovitch, or at least was not applicable to him. There was something displeasing in it; and therefore Piotr Ivanovitch again crossed himself hastily, and, it seemed to him, too hastily for proper decorum, turned around and went to the door. Schwartz was waiting for him in the next room, standing with legs wide apart, and with both hands behind his back twirling his “cylinder” hat. Piotr Ivanovitch was cheered by the first glance at Schwartz’s jovial, tidy, elegant figure. Piotr Ivanovitch comprehended that Schwartz was superior to these things, and did not give