continue..
madam, upon you. There your prudery and your violent zeal were not by any means cited as a good model: that affectation of an exterior gravity; your everlasting discourses about wisdom and honour; your grimaces and outcries at the shadow of an indecency, which yet may have all the innocence of an expression only ambiguous; that high esteem you are in with yourself, and the eye of pity you cast upon everybody else; your frequent lectures and keen censures on things that are innocent and pure. All this, madam, if I may speak frankly to you, was blamed by common consent. To what purpose, said they, that modest look, that sage outside, that gives the lie to all the rest? She’s exact at her prayers to the utmost punctilio, but she beats her servants, and pays ’em no wages. She makes a show of huge zeal in all places of devotion, but she paints, and wants to appear handsome; she can’t bear the sight of anything naked in a picture, but has a mighty love for realities. For my part, I undertook your defence against ’em every one, and positively assured ’em ’twas all scandal; but the whole run of their opinions went against me, and their conclusion was that you would do well to be less solicitous about the actions of others, and take a little pains about your own. That one ought to look a great while into oneself before we think of condemning other people; that one should add the weight of an exemplary life to the corrections we pretend to make in our neighbours; and that ’twould be still better to refer ourselves in this business to those whom Heaven has committed the care of it to. I believe also, madam, you are of too considerate a spirit not to take in good part this useful intelligence, and to attribute it to the secret motions of a zeal which gives me a thorough attachment to all your interests. Arsinoé. Whatever we may be exposed to in our reproofs, I did not expect, madam, such a reply as this; and I see plainly, by the sharpness there is in it, that my sincere advice has touched you to the quick. Célimène. Quite the contrary, madam; and if people were but wise, these mutual cautions would be brought more into fashion; they would put an end by this frank treatment of each other, to that great blindness which all are under in respect to themselves. It will be entirely your fault if we do not continue this honest office with the same zeal, and do not take great care to compare notes as to what we hear of each other, you of me, I of you. Arsinoé. Ah! madam, I can hear nothing of you, ’tis in me that a great deal is to be found fault with. Célimène. Madam, one may, I believe, praise or blame everything, and everybody may have their reason according to their age or taste. There is a season for gallantry, and there is one also proper for prudery. One may out of policy choose that when the glory of our youthful years is faded. That serves to cover some vexatious misfortunes. I don’t say but I may, one time or other, follow your steps; age brings about everything; but ’tis not the time, madam, as every one knows, to be a prude at twenty. Arsinoé. Really you plume yourself upon a very trifling advantage, and make a hideous noise with your age. Whatever mine may be more than yours, ’tis no such mighty matter to value yourself so much upon it; and I can’t imagine, madam, why you should put yourself into such a heat, and lash me in the strange manner you do. Célimène. No more can I imagine, madam, why you are observed to inveigh so bitterly against me in all places; must you be eternally revenging your vexations upon me? And how can I help it if folks won’t make love to you? If my person captivates people, and they continue daily to make me those addresses from which you may wish they would desist, I don’t know what to do in this case, and ’tis not my fault. You have a clear stage, and ’tis not I that prevents your having charms to attract them. Arsinoé. Alas! And do ye think I give myself any pain about the number of lovers which you are so vain of? And is it not very easy to judge at what price one may engage ’em nowadays? D’ye think to make one believe, as we see how things go, that your merit alone draws this crowd together? That they only burn for you with an honourable passion, and that they all make court to you on the score of your virtue? People are not blinded by vain pretences, the world is no dupe, and I see people who are formed with the power of inspiring tender sentiments who nevertheless don’t gather sparks to their houses: from thence we may draw consequences that one does not win their hearts without great advances; that nobody is our admirer only for the beauty of our eyes; and that we must pay for the court that’s made to us. Therefore don’t puff yourself up so much with glory for the trifling tinsel of a poor victory: correct a little the pride of your charms, and don’t treat people with contempt on that account. Should our eyes envy yours their conquests, I fancy we might do as other people do, be under no restraint, and let you plainly see that one has lovers when one has a mind to have ’em. Célimène. Have ’em then, madam, and let’s see this affair; labour hard by this extraordinary secret to please: and without— Arsinoé. Let us break off this kind of conversation, madam, it would transport both your temper and mine too far; and I should have already taken my leave, as I ought to do, had not my coach obliged me to wait longer. Célimène. You are at liberty to stay, madam, as long as you please, and nothing should hurry you on that account; but, without fatiguing you with ceremony to me, I am going to give you better company; and this gentleman whom chance has brought hither apropos will better supply my place in entertaining you. Title: SCENE VI Célimène. Alcestes, I must go write a line or two of a letter, which I can defer no longer without doing myself an injury: please to stay with the lady, she will easily be so good as to excuse my incivility. Title: SCENE VII Arsinoé. You see she desires I would entertain you whilst I wait a moment till my coach comes; and never could all her care offer me anything more charming than such a conversation. Indeed persons of sublime merit attract the love and esteem of everybody; and doubtless yours has hidden charms that influence my heart so as to enter into all your interests. I wish the court, by a propitious regard, would do more justice to your worth. You have reason to complain, and I am out of all patience when I daily see that they don’t do anything for you. Alcestes. Me, madam? and what pretensions have I to anything? what service have I done the state? What have I done, pray, so illustrious in itself, that I should complain of the court that they do nothing for me? Arsinoé. All those on whom the court casts a propitious eye have not always performed such famous services; there must be opportunity as well as power; and in short the merit you discover ought— Alcestes. Lack-a-day! No more of my merit, for goodness’ sake; what are you for having the court perplex itself about? It would have enough to do, and a plaguy deal o’ care upon its hands, to have people’s merit to bring to light. Arsinoé. Illustrious merit brings itself to light; yours is extremely valued in many places, and you may take it from me that in two considerable places you were yesterday extolled by people of great consequence. Alcestes. Why, madam, all the world are made fools of nowadays, and there’s nothing but what the present age confounds by that means; every man has equally great merit bestowed upon him, ’tis no longer an honour to be praised; one’s sick o’ panegyrics, and throws ’em back in people’s faces, even my valet-de-chambre is put into the gazette. Arsinoé. For my part, I could heartily wish, the better to show yourself, that an employment at court could allure you. Would you but discover the least inclination that way, one may set many engines at work to serve you, and I have persons at beck whom I’ll employ for you, who can make your way easy to everything. Alcestes. And what would you have me do there, madam? The humour I