continue..
of the least trifle, and speaks everything in your ear, even to a good-morrow. Acastes. And Gerald, madam? Célimène. O the tedious romancer! He never descends below his grand air of a lord, he’s perpetually mingling himself with the highest company, and never cites ye anything less than a duke, a prince or princess. Quality perfectly turns his head, and all his discourse turns upon nothing but horses, equipage, and dogs; he thou’s and thee’s people of highest rank, when he speaks to ’em, and the name of Sir is quite obsolete with him. Clitander. They tell you that he is all in all with Belisa. Célimène. Poor-spirited wretch! and the driest company! I suffer martyrdom when she comes to visit me. One must sweat perpetually to find out what to say to her, and the barrenness of her expression lets the conversation die at every turn. In vain do you call in the aid of all your commonplace stuff to attack her stupid silence; the fine weather, and the rain, and the cold, and the heat, are funds that one presently drains with her. At the same time, her visits, insupportable enough of ’emselves, are drawn out also to a hideous length; and one may ask what’s-a-clock, and yawn twenty times, yet no more will she stir than if she were a log of wood. Acastes. What think ye of Adrastus? Célimène. Oh! pride to extremity! a man puffed up with the love of himself; his merit is never satisfied with the court, he makes a daily trade of railing at it, and there’s not an employment, charge, or benefice they give away without doing injustice to the considerable person he fancies himself to be. Clitander. But the young Cleon, whom all the people of fashion now visit, what say you of him? Célimène. That he has gained his merit from his cook, and ’tis his table that people pay their visits to. Éiante. He takes care to have the most delicate of provisions served there. Célimène. Yes, but I should be very glad he would not serve himself up there; that same stupid person of his is a villainous dish, and it spoils, to my taste, all the entertainment he gives you. Philintes. His uncle Damis is generally very much esteemed; what say you of him, madam? Célimène. Oh! he’s one of my friends. Philintes. I take him to be a worthy man, and of good sense enough in appearance. Célimène. Yes—but, what makes me mad is, he will needs have too much wit; he’s ever upon the high strain; and one sees him labouring to be witty in everything he says. Since he took it into his head to be that clever man, nothing can hit his taste, he’s so difficult; he will needs see faults in everything one writes; and thinks that to praise is not to be a man of wit; that it is learned to find fault, and that it only belongs to fools to admire and to laugh; and that in not approving any of the works of the age, he gives himself a superiority to all other people. Even in conversation he finds something to carp at, the discourse is too low for him to condescend to; and with his arms across, he looks down with pity from the height of his genius upon all that everybody says. Acastes. A true portrait of him, split me. Clitander (to célimène). You have an admirable hand at painting people to the life. Alcestes. Courage, steady on, my brave friends of the court, you spare nothing, and every one has his turn. In the meantime, let but any one of these persons appear, and we shall see you run hastily to meet him, give him your hand, and with a flattering kiss back it with oaths that you are his humble servant. Clitander. Why do you apply yourself to us? If what is said offends you, the charge must be directed to the lady. Alcestes. No, s’death, ’tis to you; and your fawning laughs draw from her all these slanderous reflections; her satirical humour is constantly fed by the criminal incense of your flattery; her mind would find fewer charms in raillery had she observed that people did not applaud it. Thus ’tis to flatterers that one ought everywhere to impute the vices that overspread human nature. Philintes. But why so greatly interested for these people, you who would yourself condemn what is blamed in ’em? Célimène. And must not the gentleman contradict, indeed? Would you have him confine himself to the common opinion? And not display in all places the contradicting spirit that Heaven has blest him with? The sentiment of another can never please him, he always takes the contrary opinion in hand, and he would think he had the appearance of a common person should he be observed to be of anybody’s opinion but his own. The honour of contradiction has such charms with him that he very frequently takes up arms against himself, and falls foul on his own sentiments as soon as ever he discovers ’em in the mouth of another. Alcestes. The laughers are on your side, madam, that’s saying everything; and you may push your satire as far as you please against me. Philintes. But ’tis very true, too, that your way is to bluster at everything one says; and by a peevishness, which itself avows, can neither bear that one should blame or praise. Alcestes. S’death, ’tis because men are never in the right, because being peevish with ’em is always in season, and because I see that in all affairs they praise impertinently, or censure rashly. Célimène. But— Alcestes. No, madam, no, though I were to die for ’t, you have diversions that I can’t bear with; and they are in the wrong here to cherish in your mind that strong adherence to faults which they themselves blame in you. Clitander. For my part, I don’t know; but I loudly declare I always thought hitherto that the lady was without fault. Acastes. With graces and attractions I see her well stored, but for faults, they don’t fall under my observation. Alcestes. But they do under mine, and so far am I from concealing ’em, she knows I take care to reproach her with ’em. The more we love any person, the less we should flatter them; true love shows itself by giving no quarter; and for my part, I would banish all those mean-spirited lovers, whom I found submissive to all my sentiments, and whose faint-hearted complaisance would offer incense to all my extravagances. Célimène. In short, were you to be umpire of hearts, to be rightly in love, one ought to renounce all tenderness, and to place the supreme honour of a perfect passion in railing handsomely at the persons we love. Eliante. Love, for the generality, is but little regulated by these rules, and lovers are always observed to extol their choice. Never does their passion see anything to be blamed in it, and everything to them becomes amiable in the object beloved; they reckon blemishes as perfections, and know how to give favourable names to ’em. The pale vies with the jessamy in fairness, the black, even to a frightful degree, is an adorable brunette; the lean has shape and easiness; the fat has a portliness full of majesty; the naturally slattern, who has few charms, is placed under the name of a negligent beauty; the giant is a goddess in their eyes; the dwarf an epitome of all Heaven’s wonders; the haughty has a soul worthy of a diadem; the cheat has wit; the fool is all good nature; the over-talkative has agreeable humour; and the dumb preserves a decent modesty. ’Tis thus that a lover, in the extremity of his passion, loves even the very faults of those he is enamoured with. Alcestes. And, for my part, I maintain— Célimène. Let’s drop this discourse, and take a turn or two in the gallery. What! are you going, gentlemen? Clitander and Acastes. No, madam. Alcestes. You are mightily taken up with the fear of their going; go when you please, gentlemen; but I give you notice that I shan’t go hence till you are gone. Acastes. Did I not think I should be troublesome to the lady, I have nothing to call me hence the whole day. Clitander. As for me, provided I am but soon enough to attend the king at his going to bed, I have no affair else to engage me. Célimène (to alcestes). You only joke, I fancy. Alcestes. No, not in the least. We shall see whether I am the person you want to have gone. Title: SCENE VI Basque (to alcestes). Sir, here’s a man wants to speak with you about an affair which he says will admit of no delay. Alcestes. Tell him, I have no such urgent affairs. Basque. He has a jacket on