continue..
I swear it. Napoleon (holding out his hand). Yes: I am waiting for them. She gasps, daunted by his ruthless promptitude into despair of mov ing him by cajolery. She looks up perplexedly at him, racking her brains for some device to outwit him. He meets her regard inflexi bly. Lady (rising at last with a quiet little sigh). I will get them for you. They are in my room. (She turns to the door.) Napoleon. I shall accompany you, madam. Lady (drawing herself up with a noble air of offended delicacy). I cannot permit you, General, to enter my chamber. Napoleon. Then you shall stay here, madam, whilst I have your chamber searched for my papers. Lady (spitefully, openly giving up her plan). You may save yourself the trouble. They are not there. Napoleon. No: I have already told you where they are (pointing to her breast). Lady (with pretty piteousness). General: I only want to keep one little private letter. Only one. Let me have it. Napoleon (cold and stern). Is that a reasonable demand, madam? Lady (encouraged by his not refusing point-blank). No; but that is why you must grant it. Are your own demands reasonable? thousands of lives for the sake of your victories, your ambitions, your destiny! And what I ask is such a little thing. And I am only a weak woman, and you a brave man. (She looks at him with her eyes full of tender pleading, and is about to kneel to him again.) Napoleon (brusquely). Get up, get up. (He turns moodily away and takes a turn across the room, pausing for a moment to say, over his shoulder) You’re talking nonsense; and you know it. (She sits down submissively on the couch. When he turns and sees her despair, he feels that his victory is complete, and that he may now indulge in a little play with his victim. He comes back and sits beside her. She looks alarmed and moves a little away from him; but a ray of rally ing hope beams from her eye. He begins like a man enjoying some secret joke.) How do you know I am a brave man? Lady (amazed). You! General Buonaparte (Italian pronunciation). Napoleon. Yes, I, General Bonaparte (emphasizing the French pronun ciation). Lady. Oh, how can you ask such a question? you! who stood only two days ago at the bridge at Lodi, with the air full of death, fighting a duel with cannons across the river! (Shuddering.) Oh, you do brave things. Napoleon. So do you. Lady. I! (With a sudden odd thought) Oh! Are you a coward? Napoleon (laughing grimly and slapping his knees). That is the one question you must never ask a soldier. The sergeant asks after the recruit’s height, his age, his wind, his limb, but never after his courage. Lady (as if she had found it no laughing matter). Ah, you can laugh at fear. Then you don’t know what fear is. Napoleon. Tell me this. Suppose you could have got that letter by coining to me over the bridge at Lodi the day before yesterday! Suppose there had been no other way, and that this was a sure way—if only you escaped the cannon! (She shudders and covers her eyes for a moment with her hands.) Would you have been afraid? Lady. Oh, horribly afraid, agonizingly afraid. (She presses her hands on her heart.) It hurts only to imagine it. Napoleon (inflexibly). Would you have come for the despatches? Lady (overcome by the imagined horror). Don’t ask me. I must have come. Napoleon. Why? Lady. Because I must. Because there would have been no other way. Napoleon (with conviction). Because you would have wanted my letter enough to bear your fear. (He rises suddenly, and deliberately poses for an oration.) There is only one universal passion: fear. Of all the thousand qualities a man may have, the only one you will find as certainly in the youngest drummer boy in my army as in me is fear. It is fear that makes men fight: it is indifference that makes them run away: fear is the mainspring of war. Fear! I know fear well, better than you, better than any woman. I once saw a regiment of good Swiss soldiers massacred by a mob in Paris because I was afraid to interfere: I felt myself a coward to the tips of my toes as I looked on at it. Seven months ago I revenged my shame by pounding that mob to death with cannon balls. Well, what of that? Has fear ever held a man back from anything he really wanted—or a woman either? Never. Come with me; and I will show you twenty thousand cowards who will risk death every day for the price of a glass of brandy. And do you think there are no women in the army braver than the men, though their lives are worth more? Psha! I think nothing of your fear or your bravery. If you had had to come across to me at Lodi, you would not have been afraid: once on the bridge, every other feeling would have gone down before the necessity—the necessity—for making your way to my side and getting what you wanted. And now, suppose you had done all this! suppose you had come safely out with that letter in your hand, knowing that when the hour came, your fear had tightened, not your heart, but your grip of your own purpose! that it had ceased to be fear, and had become strength, penetration, vigilance, iron resolution! how would you answer then if you were asked whether you were a coward? Lady (rising). Ah, you are a hero, a real hero. Napoleon. Pooh! there’s no such thing as a real hero. (He strolls about the room, making light of her enthusiasm, but by no means displeased with himself for having evoked it.) Lady. Ah yes, there is. There is a difference between what you call my bravery and yours. You wanted to win the Battle of Lodi for yourself and not for anyone else, didn’t you? Napoleon. Of course. (Suddenly recollecting himself) Stop: no (He pulls himself piously together, and says, like a man conducting a religious service) I am only the servant of the French Republic, following humbly in the footsteps of the heroes of classical antiquity. I win battles for humanity: for my country, not for myself. Lady (disappointed). Oh, then you are only a womanish hero after all. (She sits down again, all her enthusiasm gone.) Napoleon (greatly astonished). Womanish! Lady (listlessly). Yes, like me. (With deep melancholy) Do you think that if I wanted those despatches only for myself, I dare venture into a battle for them? No: if that were all, I should not have the courage to ask to see you at your hotel, even. My courage is mere slavishness: it is of no use to me for my own purposes. It is only through love, through pity, through the instinct to save and protect someone else that I can do the things that terrify me. Napoleon (contemptuously). Pshaw! (He turns slightingly away from her.) Lady. Aha! now you see that I’m not really brave. (Relapsing into petu lant listlessness) But what right have you to despise me if you only win your battles for others? for your country! through patriotism! That is what I call womanish: it is so like a Frenchman! Napoleon (furiously). I am no Frenchman. Lady (innocently). I thought you said you won the Battle of Lodi for your country, General Bu—shall I pronounce it in Italian or French? Napoleon. You are presuming on my patience, madam. I was born a French subject, but not in France. Lady (affecting a marked access of interest in him). You were not born a subject at all, I think. Napoleon (greatly pleased). Eh? Eh? You think not. Lady. I am sure of it. Napoleon. Well, well, perhaps not. (The self-complacency of his assent catches his own ear. He stops short, reddening. Then, composing himself into a solemn attitude, modelled on the heroes of classical antiquity, he takes a high moral tone.) But we must not live for ourselves alone, little one. Never forget that we should always think of others, and work for others, and lead and govern them for their own good. Self-sacrifice is the foundation of all true nobility of character. Lady (again relaxing her attitude with a sigh). Ah, it is easy to see that you have never tried it, General. Napoleon (indignantly, forgetting all about Brutus and Scipio). What do you mean by that speech, madam? Lady. Haven’t you noticed that people always exaggerate the value of the things they haven’t got? The poor think they need nothing but riches to be quite happy and good. Everybody worships truth, purity, unselfishness, for the same reason: because they have no experience of them. Oh, if they only knew! Napoleon (with angry derision).