continue..
Gentlemen— Joseph Surface. Sir, by heaven you shall go! Charles Surface. Aye, out with him, certainly. Sir Oliver. This violence— Joseph Surface. ’Tis your own fault. Charles Surface. Out with him, to be sure. (Both forcing sir oliver out.) Enter sir peter and lady teazle, maria, and rowley. Sir Peter. My old friend, Sir Oliver—hey! What in the name of wonder! —Here are dutiful nephews!—assault their uncle at the first visit! Lady Teazle. Indeed, Sir Oliver, ’twas well we came in to rescue you. Rowley. Truly it was; for I perceive, Sir Oliver, the character of old Stanley was no protection to you. Sir Oliver. Nor of Premium either: the necessities of the former could not extort a shilling from that benevolent gentleman; and now, egad, I stood a chance of faring worse than my ancestors, and being knocked down without being bid for. After a pause, joseph and charles turning to each other. Joseph Surface. Charles! Charles Surface. Joseph! Joseph Surface. ’Tis now complete! Charles Surface. Very! Sir Oliver. Sir Peter, my friend, and Rowley too—look on that elder nephew of mine. You know what he has already received from my bounty; and you know also how gladly I would have regarded half my fortune as held in trust for him—judge, then, my disappointment in discovering him to be destitute of truth—charity—and gratitude! Sir Peter. Sir Oliver, I should be more surprised at this declaration, if I had not myself found him selfish, treacherous, and hypocritical! Lady Teazle. And if the gentleman pleads not guilty to these, pray let him call me to his character. Sir Peter. Then, I believe, we need add no more. If he knows himself, he will consider it as the most perfect punishment that he is known to the world. Charles Surface (aside). If they talk this way to Honesty, what will they say to me, by and by? (sir peter, lady teazle, and maria retire.) Sir Oliver. As for that prodigal, his brother, there— Charles Surface (aside). Aye, now comes my turn: the damned family pictures will ruin me! Joseph Surface. Sir Oliver!—uncle!—will you honour me with a hearing? Charles Surface (aside). Now if Joseph would make one of his long speeches, I might recollect myself a little. Sir Oliver (to joseph surface). I suppose you would undertake to justify yourself entirely? Joseph Surface. I trust I could. Sir Oliver. Pshaw!—Well, sir! and you (to charles) could justify yourself too, I suppose? Charles Surface. Not that I know of, Sir Oliver. Sir Oliver. What! Little Premium has been let too much into the secret, I presume? Charles Surface. True, sir; but they were family secrets, and should never be mentioned again, you know. Rowley. Come, Sir Oliver, I know you cannot speak of Charles’s follies with anger. Sir Oliver. Odd’s heart, no more I can—nor with gravity either. Sir Peter, do you know the rogue bargained with me for all his ancestors—sold me judges and generals by the foot—and maiden aunts as cheap as broken china. Charles Surface. To be sure, Sir Oliver, I did make a little free with the family canvas, that’s the truth on’t. My ancestors may certainly rise in evidence against me, there’s no denying it; but believe me sincere when I tell you—and upon my soul I would not say it if I was not—that if I do not appear mortified at the exposure of my follies, it is because I feel at this moment the warmest satisfaction in seeing you, my liberal benefactor. Sir Oliver. Charles, I believe you. Give me your hand again; the ill-looking little fellow over the settee has made your peace. Charles Surface. Then, sir, my gratitude to the original is still increased. Lady Teazle (pointing to maria). Yet, I believe, Sir Oliver, here is one whom Charles is still more anxious to be reconciled to. Sir Oliver. Oh, I have heard of his attachment there; and, with the young lady’s pardon, if I construe right—that blush— Sir Peter. Well, child, speak your sentiments. Maria. Sir, I have little to say, but that I shall rejoice to hear that he is happy; for me, whatever claim I had to his affection, I willingly resign it to one who has a better title. Charles Surface. How, Maria! Sir Peter. Heyday! what’s the mystery now? While he appeared an incorrigible rake, you would give your hand to no one else; and now that he is likely to reform, I warrant you won’t have him. Maria. His own heart—and Lady Sneerwell know the cause. Charles Surface. Lady Sneerwell! Joseph Surface. Brother, it is with great concern I am obliged to speak on this point, but my regard to justice compels me, and Lady Sneerwell’s injuries can no longer be concealed. (Goes to the door.) Enter lady sneerwell. Sir Peter. So! another French milliner! Egad, he has one in every room in the house, I suppose! Lady Sneerwell. Ungrateful Charles! Well may you be surprised, and feel for the indelicate situation which your perfidy has forced me into. Charles Surface. Pray, uncle, is this another plot of yours? For, as I have life, I don’t understand it. Joseph Surface. I believe, sir, there is but the evidence of one person more necessary to make it extremely clear. Sir Peter. And that person, I imagine, is Mr. Snake.—Rowley, you were perfectly right to bring him with us, and pray let him appear. Rowley. Walk in, Mr. Snake. Enter snake. I thought his testimony might be wanted; however, it happens unluckily, that he comes to confront Lady Sneerwell, and not to support her. Lady Sneerwell Villain! Treacherous to me at last! (Aside.)—Speak, fellow, have you too conspired against me? Snake. I beg your ladyship ten thousand pardons: you paid me extremely liberally for the lie in question; but I have unfortunately been offered double to speak the truth. Sir Peter. Plot and counterplot, egad—I wish your ladyship joy of the success of your negotiation. Lady Sneerwell. The torments of shame and disappointment on you all! Lady Teazle. Hold, Lady Sneerwell—before you go, let me thank you for the trouble you and that gentleman have taken, in writing letters to me from Charles, and answering them yourself; and let me also request you to make my respects to the Scandalous College, of which you are president, and inform them, that Lady Teazle, licentiate, begs leave to return the diploma they granted her, as she leaves off practice, and kills characters no longer. Lady Sneerwell. You too, madam!—provoking—insolent! May your husband live these fifty years! (Exit.) Sir Peter. Oons! what a fury! Lady Teazle. A malicious creature, indeed! Sir Peter. Hey! not for her last wish? Lady Teazle. Oh, no! Sir Oliver. Well, sir, and what have you to say now? Joseph Surface. Sir, I am so confounded, to find that Lady Sneerwell could be guilty of suborning Mr. Snake in this manner, to impose on us all, that I know not what to say; however, lest her revengeful spirit should prompt her to injure my brother, I had certainly better follow her directly. (Exit.) Sir Peter. Moral to the last drop! Sir Oliver. Aye, and marry her, Joseph, if you can.—Oil and vinegar, egad! you’ll do very well together. Rowley. I believe we have no more occasion for Mr. Snake at present. Snake. Before I go, I beg pardon once for all, for whatever uneasiness I have been the humble instrument of causing to the parties present. Sir Peter. Well, well, you have made atonement by a good deed at last. Snake. But I must request of the company, that it shall never be known. Sir Peter. Hey! what the plague! are you ashamed of having done a right thing once in your life? Snake. Ah, sir—consider I live by the badness of my character—I have nothing but my infamy to depend on! and, if it were once known that I had been betrayed into an honest action, I should lose every friend I have in the world. Sir Oliver. Well, well—we’ll not traduce you by saying anything in your praise, never fear. (Exit snake.) Sir Peter. There’s a precious rogue! yet that fellow is a writer and a critic! Lady Teazle. See, Sir Oliver, there needs no persuasion now to reconcile your nephew and Maria. (charles and maria apart.) Sir Oliver. Aye, aye, that’s as it should be, and, egad, we’ll have the wedding to-morrow morning. Charles Surface. Thank you, my dear uncle. Sir Peter. What, you rogue! don’t you ask the girl’s consent first? Charles Surface. Oh, I have done that a long time—above a minute ago— and she has looked yes. Maria. For shame, Charles!—I protest, Sir Peter, there has not been a word— Sir Oliver. Well, then, the fewer the better—may your love for each other never know abatement. Sir Peter. And may you live as happily together as Lady Teazle and I— intend to do! Charles Surface. Rowley, my old friend, I am sure you