continue..
I don’t think she looks more. Sir Benjamin. Ah! there is no judging by her looks, unless one could see her face. Lady Sneerwell. Well, well, if Mrs. Evergreen does take some pains to repair the ravages of time, you must allow she effects it with great ingenuity; and surely that’s better than the careless manner in which the widow Ochre caulks her wrinkles. Sir Benjamin. Nay, now, Lady Sneerwell, you are severe upon the widow. Come, come, it is not that she paints so ill—but, when she has finished her face, she joins it on so badly to her neck, that she looks like a mended statue, in which the connoisseur may see at once that the head’s modern, though the trunk’s antique! Crabtree. Ha! ha! ha! Well said, nephew! Mrs. Candour. Ha! ha! ha! Well, you make me laugh, but I vow I hate you for’t. What do you think of Miss Simper? Sir Benjamin. Why, she has very pretty teeth. Lady Teazle. Yes; and on that account, when she is neither speaking nor laughing (which very seldom happens), she never absolutely shuts her mouth, but leaves it always on a jar, as it were. Mrs. Candour. How can you be so ill-natured? Lady Teazle. Nay, I allow even that’s better than the pains Mrs. Prim takes to conceal her losses in front. She draws her mouth till it positively resembles the aperture of a poor’s-box, and all her words appear to slide out edgeways. Lady Sneerwell. Very well, Lady Teazle; I see you can be a little severe. Lady Teazle. In defence of a friend it is but justice—but here comes Sir Peter to spoil our pleasantry. Enter sir peter teazle. Sir Peter. Ladies, your most obedient—Mercy on me, here is the whole set! a character dead at every word, I suppose. (Aside.) Mrs. Candour. I am rejoiced you are come, Sir Peter. They have been so censorious. They will allow good qualities to nobody—not even good nature to our friend Mrs. Pursy. Lady Teazle. What, the fat dowager who was at Mrs. Codille’s last night? Mrs. Candour. Nay, her bulk is her misfortune; and, when she takes such pains to get rid of it, you ought not to reflect on her. Lady Sneerwell. That’s very true, indeed. Lady Teazle. Yes, I know she almost lives on acids and small whey; laces herself by pulleys; and often, in the hottest noon of summer, you may see her on a little squat pony, with her hair platted up behind like a drummer’s, and puffing round the Ring on a full trot. Mrs. Candour. I thank you, Lady Teazle, for defending her. Sir Peter. Yes, a good defence, truly. Mrs. Candour. But Sir Benjamin is as censorious as Miss Sallow. Crabtree. Yes, and she is a curious being to pretend to be censorious!—an awkward gawky, without any one good point under heaven. Mrs. Candour. Positively you shall not be so very severe. Miss Sallow is a relation of mine by marriage, and, as for her person, great allowance is to be made; for, let me tell you, a woman labours under many disadvantages who tries to pass for a girl at six-and-thirty. Lady Sneerwell. Though, surely, she is handsome still—and for the weakness in her eyes, considering how much she reads by candlelight, it is not to be wondered at. Mrs. Candour. True; and then as to her manner, upon my word I think it is particularly graceful, considering she never had the least education; for you know her mother was a Welsh milliner, and her father a sugar-baker at Bristol. Sir Benjamin. Ah! you are both of you too good-natured! Sir Peter. Yes, damned good-natured! This their own relation! mercy on me! (Aside.) Sir Benjamin. And Mrs. Candour is of so moral a turn she can sit for an hour to hear Lady Stucco talk sentiment. Lady Teazle. Nay, I vow Lady Stucco is very well with the dessert after dinner; for she’s just like the French fruit one cracks for mottoes—made up of paint and proverb. Mrs. Candour. Well, I never will join in ridiculing a friend; and so I constantly tell my cousin Ogle, and you all know what pretensions she has to be critical in beauty. Crabtree. Oh, to be sure! she has herself the oddest countenance that ever was seen; ’tis a collection of features from all the different countries of the globe. Sir Benjamin. So she has, indeed—an Irish front! Crabtree. Caledonian locks! Sir Benjamin. Dutch nose! Crabtree. Austrian lip! Sir Benjamin. Complexion of a Spaniard! Crabtree. And teeth à la Chinoise! Sir Benjamin. In short, her face resembles a table d’hôte at Spa—where no two guests are of a nation— Crabtree. Or a congress at the close of a general war—wherein all the members, even to her eyes, appear to have a different interest, and her nose and chin are the only parties likely to join issue. Mrs. Candour. Ha! ha! ha! Sir Peter. Mercy on my life!—a person they dine with twice a week! (Aside.) Lady Sneerwell. Go—go—you are a couple of provoking toads. Mrs. Candour. Nay, but I vow you shall not carry the laugh off so—for give me leave to say, that Mrs. Ogle— Sir Peter. Madam, madam, I beg your pardon—there’s no stopping these good gentlemen’s tongues. But when I tell you, Mrs. Candour, that the lady they are abusing is a particular friend of mine—I hope you’ll not take her part. Lady Sneerwell. Well said, Sir Peter! but you are a cruel creature—too phlegmatic yourself for a jest, and too peevish to allow wit on others. Sir Peter. Ah, madam, true wit is more nearly allied to good nature than your ladyship is aware of. Lady Teazle. True, Sir Peter; I believe they are so near akin that they can never be united. Sir Benjamin. Or rather, madam, suppose them man and wife, because one so seldom sees them together. Lady Teazle. But Sir Peter is such an enemy to scandal, I believe he would have it put down by parliament. Sir Peter. ’Fore heaven, madam, if they were to consider the sporting with reputation of as much importance as poaching on manors, and pass An Act for the Preservation of Fame, I believe many would thank them for the bill. Lady Sneerwell. O lud! Sir Peter; would you deprive us of our privileges? Sir Peter. Aye, madam; and then no person should be permitted to kill characters or run down reputations, but qualified old maids and disappointed widows. Lady Sneerwell. Go, you monster! Mrs. Candour. But sure you would not be quite so severe on those who only report what they hear. Sir Peter. Yes, madam, I would have law merchant for them too; and in all cases of slander currency, whenever the drawer of the lie was not to be found, the injured parties should have a right to come on any of the indorsers. Crabtree. Well, for my part, I believe there never was a scandalous tale without some foundation. Lady Sneerwell. Come, ladies, shall we sit down to cards in the next room? Enter servant and whispers sir peter. Sir Peter. I’ll be with them directly.—(Exit servant.) I’ll get away unperceived. (Aside.) Lady Sneerwell. Sir Peter, you are not leaving us? Sir Peter. Your ladyship must excuse me; I’m called away by particular business—but I leave my character behind me. (Exit sir peter.) Sir Benjamin. Well certainly, Lady Teazle, that lord of yours is a strange being; I could tell you some stories of him would make you laugh heartily, if he wasn’t your husband. Lady Teazle. O pray don’t mind that—come, do let’s hear them. They join the rest of the company, all talking as they are going into the next room. Joseph Surface (rising with maria). Maria, I see you have no satisfaction in this society. Maria. How is it possible I should? If to raise malicious smiles at the infirmities and misfortunes of those who have never injured us be the province of wit or humour, heaven grant me a double portion of dullness! Joseph Surface. Yet they appear more ill-natured than they are; they have no malice at heart. Maria. Then is their conduct still more contemptible; for, in my opinion, nothing could excuse the intemperance of their tongues but a natural and ungovernable bitterness of mind. Joseph Surface. But can you, Maria, feel thus for others, and be unkind to me alone? Is hope to be denied the tenderest passion? Maria. Why will you distress me by renewing this subject? Joseph Surface. Ah, Maria! you would not treat me thus, and oppose your guardian, Sir Peter’s will, but that I see that profligate Charles is still a favoured rival. Maria. Ungenerously urged! But, whatever my sentiments of that unfortunate young man are, be assured I shall not feel more bound to give him up, because his distresses have lost him the regard even of a brother. lady teazle