continue..
stopping the leaks and putting back into position the guns which had escaped the disaster, the old passenger had gone on deck. He stood with his back against the mainmast. He had paid no attention to a proceeding which had taken place on the vessel. The Chevalier Le Vieuville had drawn up the marines in line on either side of the mainmast, and at the whistle of the boatswain the sailors busy in the rigging stood upright on the yards. Count du Boisberthelot advanced toward the passenger. Behind the captain marched a man, haggard, breathless, his dress in disorder, yet wearing a satisfied look under it all. It was the gunner who had just now so opportunely shown himself a tamer of monsters, and who had got the better of the cannon. The count made a military salute to the unknown in peasant garb, and said to him— “General, here is the man.” The gunner held himself erect, his eyes downcast, standing in a soldierly attitude. Count du Boisberthelot continued— “General, taking into consideration what this man has done, do you not think there is something for his commanders to do?” “I think there is,” said the old man. “Be good enough to give the orders,” returned Boisberthelot. “It is for you to give them. You are the captain.” “But you are the general,” answered Boisberthelot. The old man looked at the gunner. “Approach,” said he. The gunner moved forward a step. The old man turned toward Count du Boisberthelot, detached the cross of Saint Louis from the captain’s uniform and fastened it on the jacket of the gunner. “Hurrah!” cried the sailors. The marines presented arms. The old passenger, pointing with his finger toward the bewildered gunner, added— “Now let that man be shot.” Stupor succeeded the applause. Then, in the midst of a silence like that of the tomb, the old man raised his voice. He said— “A negligence has endangered this ship. At this moment she is perhaps lost. To be at sea is to face the enemy. A vessel at open sea is an army which gives battle. The tempest conceals, but does not absent itself. The whole sea is an ambuscade. “Death is the penalty of any fault committed in the face of the enemy. No fault is reparable. Courage ought to be rewarded and negligence punished.” These words fell one after the other, slowly, solemnly, with a sort of inexorable measure, like the blows of an ax upon an oak. And the old man, turning to the soldiers, added— “Do your duty.” The man upon whose breast shone the cross of Saint Louis bowed his head. At a sign from Count du Boisberthelot, two sailors descended between decks, then returned, bringing the hammock winding sheet. The ship’s chaplain, who since the time of sailing had been at prayer in the officers’ quarters, accompanied the two sailors; a sergeant detached from the line twelve marines, whom he arranged in two ranks, six by six; the gunner, without uttering a word, placed himself between the two files. The chaplain, crucifix in hand, advanced and stood near him. “March!” said the sergeant. The platoon moved with slow steps toward the bow. The two sailors who carried the shroud followed. A gloomy silence fell upon the corvette. A hurricane moaned in the distance. A moment later gunfire sounded in the shadows, a light flashed, and all was silent; then came the sound of a body falling into the sea. The foregoing consists of Part I, Book II, Chapters IV–VI of Victor Hugo’s ninety-three .