continue..
afford to part with my spirits; but I shall be rich and splenetic, all in good time. However, I suppose you are surprised that I am not more sorrowful at parting with so many near relations; to be sure, ’tis very affecting; but, rot ’em, you see they never move a muscle, so why should I? Rowley. There’s no making you serious a moment. Charles Surface. Yes, faith: I am so now. Here, my honest Rowley, here, get me this changed, and take a hundred pounds of it immediately to old Stanley. Rowley. A hundred pounds! Consider only— Charles Surface. Gad’s life, don’t talk about it! poor Stanley’s wants are pressing, and, if you don’t make haste, we shall have some one call that has a better right to the money. Rowley. Ah! there’s the point! I never will cease dunning you with the old proverb— Charles Surface. “Be just before you’re generous,” hey! Why, so I would if I could; but Justice is an old lame hobbling beldam, and I can’t get her to keep pace with Generosity, for the soul of me. Rowley. Yet, Charles, believe me, one hour’s reflection— Charles Surface. Aye, aye, it’s all very true; but, hark’ee, Rowley, while I have, by heaven I’ll give—so, damn your economy! and now for hazard. (Exit.) Title: SCENE II—The parlour Enter sir oliver surface and moses. Moses. Well, sir, I think, as Sir Peter said, you have seen Mr. Charles in high glory; ’tis great pity he’s so extravagant. Sir Oliver. True, but he wouldn’t sell my picture. Moses. And loves wine and women so much. Sir Oliver. But he wouldn’t sell my picture! Moses. And games so deep. Sir Oliver. But he wouldn’t sell my picture. Oh, here’s Rowley. Enter rowley. Rowley. So, Sir Oliver, I find you have made a purchase— Sir Oliver. Yes, yes, our young rake has parted with his ancestors like old tapestry. Rowley. And here has he commissioned me to redeliver you part of the purchase-money—I mean, though, in your necessitous character of old Stanley. Moses. Ah! there is the pity of all: he is so damned charitable. Rowley. And I left a hosier and two tailors in the hall, who, I’m sure, won’t be paid, and this hundred would satisfy ’em. Sir Oliver. Well, well, I’ll pay his debts—and his benevolence too; but now I am no more a broker, and you shall introduce me to the elder brother as old Stanley. Rowley. Not yet awhile; Sir Peter, I know, means to call there about this time. Enter trip Trip. O gentlemen, I beg pardon for not showing you out; this way—Moses, a word. (Exeunt trip and moses.) Sir Oliver. There’s a fellow for you! Would you believe it, that puppy intercepted the Jew on our coming, and wanted to raise money before he got to his master! Rowley. Indeed! Sir Oliver. Yes, they are now planning an annuity business. Ah, Master Rowley, in my days, servants were content with the follies of their masters, when they were worn a little threadbare—but now they have their vices, like their birthday clothes, with the gloss on. Title: SCENE III—A library inJOSEPH SURFACE’Shouse joseph surface and servant. Joseph Surface. No letter from Lady Teazle? Servant. No, sir. Joseph Surface (aside). I am surprised she hasn’t sent, if she is prevented from coming. Sir Peter certainly does not suspect me. Yet I wish I may not lose the heiress, through the scrape I have drawn myself in with the wife; however, Charles’s imprudence and bad character are great points in my favor. (Knocking.) Servant. Sir, I believe that must be Lady Teazle. Joseph Surface. Hold! See whether it is or not, before you go to the door—I have a particular message for you, if it should be my brother. Servant. ’Tis her ladyship, sir; she always leaves her chair at the milliner’s in the next street. Joseph Surface. Stay, stay—draw that screen before the window—that will do; my opposite neighbor is a maiden lady of so curious a temper. (Servant draws the screen, and exit.) I have a difficult hand to play in this affair. Lady Teazle has lately suspected my views on Maria; but she must by no means be let into that secret—at least, not till I have her more in my power. Enter lady teazle. Lady Teazle. What, sentiment in soliloquy! Have you been very impatient now? O lud! don’t pretend to look grave. I vow I couldn’t come before. Joseph Surface. O madam, punctuality is a species of constancy, a very unfashionable quality in a lady. Lady Teazle. Upon my word, you ought to pity me. Do you know that Sir Peter is grown so ill-tempered to me of late, and so jealous of Charles too—that’s the best of the story, isn’t it? Joseph Surface (aside). I am glad my scandalous friends keep that up. Lady Teazle. I am sure I wish he would let Maria marry him, and then perhaps he would be convinced; don’t you, Mr. Surface? Joseph Surface (aside). Indeed I do not.—Oh, certainly I do! for then my dear Lady Teazle would also be convinced how wrong her suspicions were of my having any design on the silly girl. Lady Teazle. Well, well, I’m inclined to believe you. But isn’t it provoking, to have the most ill-natured things said to one? And there’s my friend Lady Sneerwell has circulated I don’t know how many scandalous tales of me! and all without any foundation, too—that’s what vexes me. Joseph Surface. Aye, madam, to be sure, that is the provoking circumstance—without foundation! yes, yes, there’s the mortification, indeed; for, when a scandalous story is believed against one, there certainly is no comfort like the consciousness of having deserved it. Lady Teazle. No, to be sure—then I’d forgive their malice; but to attack me, who am really so innocent, and who never say an ill-natured thing of anybody—that is, of any friend—and then Sir Peter, too, to have him so peevish, and so suspicious, when I know the integrity of my own heart—indeed ’tis monstrous! Joseph Surface. But, my dear Lady Teazle, ’tis your own fault if you suffer it. When a husband entertains a groundless suspicion of his wife, and withdraws his confidence from her, the original compact is broke, and she owes it to the honour of her sex to endeavour to outwit him. Lady Teazle. Indeed! So that, if he suspects me without cause, it follows that the best way of curing his jealousy is to give him reason for’t? Joseph Surface. Undoubtedly—for your husband should never be deceived in you: and in that case it becomes you to be frail in compliment to his discernment. Lady Teazle. To be sure, what you say is very reasonable, and when the consciousness of my own innocence— Joseph Surface. Ah, my dear madam, there is the great mistake; ’tis this very conscious innocence that is of the greatest prejudice to you. What is it makes you negligent of forms, and careless of the world’s opinion? why, the consciousness of your innocence. What makes you thoughtless in your conduct, and apt to run into a thousand little imprudences? why, the consciousness of your innocence. What makes you impatient of Sir Peter’s temper and outrageous at his suspicions? why, the consciousness of your own innocence! Lady Teazle. ’Tis very true! Joseph Surface. Now, my dear Lady Teazle, if you would but once make a trifling faux pas, you can’t conceive how cautious you would grow—and how ready to humour and agree with your husband. Lady Teazle. Do you think so? Joseph Surface. Oh, I’m sure on’t; and then you would find all scandal would cease at once, for—in short, your character at present is like a person in a plethora, absolutely dying of too much health. Lady Teazle. So, so; then I perceive your prescription is, that I must sin in my own defence, and part with my virtue to preserve my reputation? Joseph Surface. Exactly so, upon my credit, ma’am. Lady Teazle. Well, certainly this is the oddest doctrine, and the newest receipt for avoiding calumny? Joseph Surface. An infallible one, believe me. Prudence, like experience, must be paid for. Lady Teazle. Why, if my understanding were once convinced— Joseph Surface. Oh, certainly, madam, your understanding should be convinced. Yes, yes—heaven forbid I should persuade you to do anything you thought wrong. No, no, I have too much honour to desire it. Lady Teazle. Don’t you think we may as well leave honour out of the argument? Joseph Surface. Ah, the ill effects of your country education, I see, still remain with you. Lady Teazle. I doubt they do, indeed; and I will fairly own to you, that if I could be persuaded to do wrong, it would be by Sir Peter’s ill usage sooner than your honourable logic, after all. Joseph Surface. Then, by this hand, which he is unworthy of— (Taking her hand.) Re-enter servant. ’Sdeath, you