continue..
age! But how’s this, Sir Peter? you don’t join in your friend Joseph’s praise, as I expected. Sir Peter. Sir Oliver, we live in a damned wicked world, and the fewer we praise the better. Rowley. What! do you say so, Sir Peter, who were never mistaken in your life? Sir Peter. Pshaw! plague on you both! I see by your sneering you have heard the whole affair. I shall go mad among you! Rowley. Then, to fret you no longer, Sir Peter, we are indeed acquainted with it all. I met Lady Teazle coming from Mr. Surface’s, so humbled that she deigned to request me to be her advocate with you. Sir Peter. And does Sir Oliver know all too? Sir Oliver. Every circumstance. Sir Peter. What, of the closet—and the screen, hey? Sir Oliver. Yes, yes, and the little French milliner. Oh, I have been vastly diverted with the story! ha! ha! Sir Peter. ’Twas very pleasant. Sir Oliver. I never laughed more in my life, I assure you: ha! ha! Sir Peter. O, vastly diverting! ha! ha! Rowley. To be sure, Joseph with his sentiments! ha! ha! Sir Peter. Yes, yes, his sentiments! ha! ha! A hypocritical villain! Sir Oliver. Aye, and that rogue Charles to pull Sir Peter out of the closet: ha! ha! Sir Peter. Ha! ha! ’twas devilish entertaining, to be sure! Sir Oliver. Ha! ha! Egad, Sir Peter, I should like to have seen your face when the screen was thrown down: ha! ha! Sir Peter. Yes, yes, my face when the screen was thrown down: ha! ha! Oh, I must never show my head again! Sir Oliver. But come, come, it isn’t fair to laugh at you neither, my old friend—though, upon my soul, I can’t help it. Sir Peter. Oh, pray don’t restrain your mirth on my account—it does not hurt me at all! I laugh at the whole affair myself. Yes, yes, I think being a standing jest for all one’s acquaintances a very happy situation. O yes, and then of a morning to read the paragraphs about Mr. S—, Lady T—, and Sir P—, will be so entertaining! Rowley. Without affectation, Sir Peter, you may despise the ridicule of fools. But I see Lady Teazle going towards the next room; I am sure you must desire a reconciliation as earnestly as she does. Sir Oliver. Perhaps my being here prevents her coming to you. Well, I’ll leave honest Rowley to mediate between you; but he must bring you all presently to Mr. Surface’s, where I am now returning, if not to reclaim a libertine, at least to expose hypocrisy. Sir Peter. Ah! I’ll be present at your discovering yourself there with all my heart—though ’tis a vile unlucky place for discoveries! Rowley. We’ll follow. (Exit sir oliver surface.) Sir Peter. She is not coming here, you see, Rowley. Rowley. No, but she has left the door of that room open, you perceive. See, she is in tears! Sir Peter. Certainly a little mortification appears very becoming in a wife! Don’t you think it will do her good to let her pine a little? Rowley. Oh, this is ungenerous in you! Sir Peter. Well, I know not what to think. You remember, Rowley, the letter I found of hers, evidently intended for Charles! Rowley. A mere forgery, Sir Peter! laid in your way on purpose. This is one of the points which I intend Snake shall give you conviction on. Sir Peter. I wish I were once satisfied of that. She looks this way. What a remarkably elegant turn of the head she has! Rowley, I’ll go to her. Rowley. Certainly. Sir Peter. Though, when it is known that we are reconciled, people will laugh at me ten times more! Rowley. Let them laugh, and retort their malice only by showing them you are happy in spite of it. Sir Peter. I’faith, so I will! and, if I’m not mistaken, we may yet be the happiest couple in the country. Rowley. Nay, Sir Peter—he who once lays aside suspicion— Sir Peter. Hold, my dear Rowley! if you have any regard for me, never let me hear you utter anything like a sentiment—I have had enough of them to serve me the rest of my life. (Exeunt.) Title: SCENE III—The library inJOSEPH SURFACE’Shouse. joseph surface and lady sneerwell. Lady Sneerwell. Impossible! Will not Sir Peter immediately be reconciled to Charles, and of consequence no longer oppose his union with Maria? The thought is distraction to me! Joseph Surface. Can passion furnish a remedy? Lady Sneerwell. No, nor cunning either. Oh, I was a fool, an idiot, to league with such a blunderer! Joseph Surface. Sure, Lady Sneerwell, I am the greatest sufferer; yet you see I bear the accident with calmness. Lady Sneerwell. Because the disappointment doesn’t reach your heart; your interest only attached you to Maria. Had you felt for her what I have for that ungrateful libertine, neither your temper nor hypocrisy could prevent your showing the sharpness of your vexation. Joseph Surface. But why should your reproaches fall on me for this disappointment? Lady Sneerwell Are you not the cause of it? What had you to do to bate in your pursuit of Maria to pervert Lady Teazle by the way? Had you not a sufficient field for your roguery in blinding Sir Peter, and supplanting your brother? I hate such an avarice of crimes; ’tis an unfair monopoly, and never prospers. Joseph Surface. Well, I admit I have been to blame. I confess I deviated from the direct road of wrong, but I don’t think we’re so totally defeated neither. Lady Sneerwell. No! Joseph Surface. You tell me you have made a trial of Snake since we met, and that you still believe him faithful to us— Lady Sneerwell. I do believe so. Joseph Surface. And that he has undertaken, should it be necessary, to swear and prove that Charles is at this time contracted by vows and honour to your ladyship—which some of his former letters to you will serve to support? Lady Sneerwell. This, indeed, might have assisted. Joseph Surface. Come, come; it is not too late yet—(Knocking at the door.) But hark! this is probably my uncle, Sir Oliver: retire to that room; well consult farther when he’s gone. Lady Sneerwell. Well! but if he should find you out too— Joseph Surface. Oh, I have no fear of that. Sir Peter will hold his tongue for his own credit’s sake—and you may depend on’t I shall soon discover Sir Oliver’s weak side! Lady Sneerwell. I have no diffidence of your abilities—only be constant to one roguery at a time. (Exit.) Joseph Surface. I will, I will! So! ’tis confounded hard, after such bad fortune, to be baited by one’s confederate in evil. Well, at all events, my character is so much better than Charles’s, that I certainly— hey!—what!—this is not Sir Oliver, but old Stanley again! Plague on’t! that he should return to tease me just now! We shall have Sir Oliver come and find him here—and— Enter sir oliver surface. Gad’s life, Mr. Stanley, why have you come back to plague me just at this time? You must not stay now, upon my word. Sir Oliver. Sir, I hear your uncle Oliver is expected here, and though he has been so penurious to you, I’ll try what he’ll do for me. Joseph Surface. Sir, ’tis impossible for you to stay now, so I must beg—Come any other time, and I promise you, you shall be assisted. Sir Oliver. No: Sir Oliver and I must be acquainted. Joseph Surface. Zounds, sir! then I insist on your quitting the room directly. Sir Oliver. Nay, sir! Joseph Surface. Sir, I insist on’t!—Here, William! show this gentleman out. Since you compel me, sir—not one moment—this is such insolence! (Going to push him out.) Enter charles surface. Charles Surface. Heyday! what’s the matter now? What the devil, have you got hold of my little broker here? Zounds, brother, don’t hurt little Premium. What’s the matter, my little fellow? Joseph Surface. So! he has been with you, too, has he? Charles Surface. To be sure he has! Why, ’tis as honest a little—But sure, Joseph, you have not been borrowing money too, have you? Joseph Surface. Borrowing! no! But, brother, you know here we expect Sir Oliver every— Charles Surface. O gad, that’s true! Noll mustn’t find the little broker here, to be sure. Joseph Surface. Yet, Mr. Stanley insists— Charles Surface. Stanley! why his name is Premium. Joseph Surface. No, no, Stanley. Charles Surface. No, no, Premium. Joseph Surface. Well, no matter which—but— Charles Surface. Aye, aye, Stanley or Premium, ’tis the same thing, as you say; for I suppose he goes by half a hundred names, besides A.B.’s at the coffee-houses. Joseph Surface. Death! here’s Sir Oliver at the door. (Knocking again.) Now I beg, Mr. Stanley— Charles Surface. Aye, and I beg, Mr. Premium— Sir Oliver.