continue..
We shall see. Orontes. Hope—I don’t know whether the style may appear sufficiently clear and easy, and whether you will be satisfied with the choice of the words. Alcestes. We shall see presently, sir. Orontes. Besides, you must know that I took up no longer time than a quarter of an hour in making of ’em. Alcestes. Let us see, sir, the time makes nothing to the purpose. Orontes. Poem ```Hope, for a while, allays, ’tis true, And rocks to sleep our tedious pain: But, Phyllis, poor gain must accrue, When nothing marches in its train.``` Philintes. I am charmed already with this little taste. Alcestes (softly). What! Have you the assurance to admire this? Orontes. Poem ```You showed indeed great complaisance, Less had been better, take my word; Why should you be at that expense, When hope was all you could afford?``` Philintes. O! in what gallant terms these things are couched! Alcestes (softly). O fie! vile complaisance! You praise things that are stupid. Orontes. Poem ```But if an endless expectation, Push to the last extreme my passion, Death must be my reliever. Nor, to prevent this, serves your care; Fair Phyllis, ’tis downright despair, When we must hope for ever.``` Philintes. The conclusion is pretty, amorous, admirable. Alcestes (softly). Plague o’ your conclusion! Deuce take that poisoned tongue! would you had concluded your head off! Philintes. I never heard verses so well turned. Alcestes (softly). S’death— Orontes (to philintes). You flatter me, and you think perhaps— Philintes. No, I don’t flatter at all. Alcestes (softly). Heh! What d’ye then, treacherous creature? Orontes (to alcestes). But now for you, you know the agreement we made; pray, speak with sincerity. Alcestes. Sir, this is always a most delicate affair, and in point of genius, we love people should flatter us. But I was saying one day to a certain person who shall be nameless, seeing some verses of his composition, that it is necessary a fine gentleman should always have a great command over that itch of writing which we are so apt to catch; that he should keep a strait rein over the great propensity one has to make a show with such amusements; and that people are exposed, by the eagerness of showing their works, to make but a very scurvy figure. Orontes. What, would you have me understand by this, that I am wrong to pretend— Alcestes. I don’t say that. But I told him that a heavy composition does a person’s business, that there needs no other foible to disgrace a man; and that though they had in other respects a hundred fine qualities, yet we view people on their weak sides. Orontes. D’ye mean that you have any objection to my song? Alcestes. I don’t say that; but that he should not write, I set before his eyes how, in our time, this thirst has spoiled many very worthy people. Orontes. What, do I write ill? and should I resemble them? Alcestes. I don’t say that. But in short, says I to him, what occasion so urgent have you to rhyme? and who the deuce drives you into print? if one could pardon the sending a bad book into the world, it would only be in those wretches who compose for a livelihood. Take my advice, withstand your present intentions, keep such business as this from public view, and don’t throw away what people challenge from you, the reputation which you have at court of a worthy gentleman, to receive by the hands of a greedy printer that of a ridiculous and wretched author. This is what I endeavoured to make him comprehend. Orontes. Admirably well put; and I think I understand you. But mayn’t I know what it is in my song that— Alcestes. Frankly, ’tis a very good one to lock up in your scrutoire; you have been governed by villainous models, and your expressions are not at all natural. Poem ```Pray what is—And rocks to sleep our tedious pain? And what—When nothing marches in its train? What—Why should you be at that expense, When hope was all you could afford? And that—Fair Phyllis, ’tis downright despair, When we must hope for ever?``` This figurative style that people are so vain of is wide of all just character, and of truth; ’tis nothing but playing with words, pure affectation, and ’tis not thus that nature speaks. The wretched taste of the age in this case is horrible. Our forefathers, unpolished as they were, had a much better one; and I take all this that people admire to be much inferior to an old ballad that I am going to repeat to you: Poem ```Had Royal Henry given to me His Paris large and fair, And I straightway must quit for aye The love of my own dear; I’d say pardie, my Liege Henry, Take back your Paris fair; Much mo love I my dear, truly, Much mo love I my dear.``` The versification is not rich, and the style is antiquated. But don’t you see that this is infinitely better than such gewgaw stuff as good sense would despite? And that pure nature speaks here void of art? Poem ```Had Royal Henry given to me His Paris large and fair, And I straightway must quit for aye, The love of my own dear; I’d say pardie, my Liege Henry, Take back your Paris fair; Much mo love I my dear, truly, Much mo love I my dear.``` This is what a heart may say that’s really smitten. (To philintes, laughing.) Yes, Mr. Sneerer, in spite of all your beaux esprits, I value this more than all the flourishing fustian of the tinsel, which people so generally cry up. Orontes. And I maintain that my verses are very good. Alcestes. You have your reasons to think ’em so; but you will please to allow me to have others which would be excused from submitting to yours. Orontes. ’Tis sufficient for me that I see other people value them. Alcestes. ’Tis because they have the art of dissimulation and I have not. Orontes. Do you think you have so great a share of wit? Alcestes. If I commended your verses I should have more. Orontes. I shall be very well satisfied without your approbation. Alcestes. ’Twill be very expedient, if you please, that you should be satisfied without it. Orontes. I should be very glad, for trial, that you would compose some verses upon the same subject after your manner. Alcestes. I might unluckily make as bad ones; but I should take care how I showed ’em to people. Orontes. You speak to me with a great deal of assurance, and this sufficiency— Alcestes. Pray seek somebody else to flatter you, and not me. Orontes. But, my little sir, don’t be so much in your altitudes. Alcestes. Faith, my great sir, I am just as much in my altitudes as I should be. Philintes (stepping between them). Nay, gentlemen, that is carrying the matter too far, pray have done with it. Orontes. I’m in the wrong, I confess it, and I quit the place. I am your slave, sir, with all my heart. Alcestes. And I am, sir, your humble servant. Title: SCENE III Philintes. Well, you see; by being too sincere, you had like to have had a troublesome affair upon your hands; and I saw that Orontes wanted to be flattered, when— Alcestes. Don’t speak to me. Philintes. But— Alcestes. No more society. Philintes. ’Tis too much— Alcestes. Leave me. Philintes. If I— Alcestes. No more words. Philintes. But how— Alcestes. I hear nothing. Philintes. But— Alcestes. Again? Philintes. This is an outrageous— Alcestes. S’death, this is too much, don’t follow me at the heels. Philintes. You joke with me; I shan’t leave you.