Work: An Enemy of the People Field: enemy of the people Author: Henrik Ibsen Title: ACT V S cene . dr. stockmann’s study . Bookcases, and cabinets containing specimens, line the walls. At the back is a door leading to the hall; in the foreground on the left, a door leading to the sitting room. In the right-hand wall are two windows, of which all the panes are broken. The doctor’s desk, littered with books and papers, stands in the middle of the room, which is in disorder . It is morning. dr. stockmann in dressing gown, slippers and a smoking cap, is bending down and raking with an umbrella under one of the cabinets . After a little while he rakes out a stone. Dr. Stockmann (calling through the open sitting room door). Katherine, I have found another one. Mrs. Stockmann (from the sitting room). Oh, you will find a lot more yet, I expect. Dr. Stockmann (adding the stone to a heap of others on the table). I shall treasure these stones as relics. Ejlif and Morten shall look at them every day, and when they are grown up they shall inherit them as heirlooms. (Rakes about under a bookcase.) Hasn’t—what the deuce is her name?—the girl, you know—hasn’t she been to fetch the glazier, yet? Mrs. Stockmann (coming in). Yes, but he said he didn’t know if he would be able to come today. Dr. Stockmann. You will see he won’t dare to come. Mrs. Stockmann. Well, that is just what Randine thought—that he didn’t dare to, on account of the neighbors. (Calls into the sitting room.) What is it you want, Randine? Give it to me. (Goes in, and comes out again directly.) Here is a letter for you, Thomas. Dr. Stockmann. Let me see it. (Opens and reads it.) Ah!—of course. Mrs. Stockmann. Who is it from? Dr. Stockmann. From the landlord. Notice to quit. Mrs. Stockmann. Is it possible? Such a nice man— Dr. Stockmann (looking at the letter). Does not dare do otherwise, he says. Doesn’t like doing it, but dare not do otherwise—on account of his fellow citizens—out of regard for public opinion. Is in a dependent position—dare not offend certain influential men— Mrs. Stockmann. There, you see, Thomas! Dr. Stockmann. Yes, yes, I see well enough; the whole lot of them in the town are cowards; not a man among them dares do anything for fear of the others. (Throws the letter on to the table.) But it doesn’t matter to us, Katherine. We are going to sail away to the New World, and— Mrs. Stockmann. But, Thomas, are you sure we are well advised to take this step? Dr. Stockmann. Are you suggesting that I should stay here, where they have pilloried me as an enemy of the people—branded me—broken my windows! And just look here, Katherine—they have torn a great rent in my black trousers too! Mrs. Stockmann. Oh, dear!—and they are the best pair you have got! Dr. Stockmann. You should never wear your best trousers when you go out to fight for freedom and truth. It is not that I care so much about the trousers, you know; you can always sew them up again for me. But that the common herd should dare to make this attack on me, as if they were my equals—that is what I cannot, for the life of me, swallow! Mrs. Stockmann. There is no doubt they have behaved very ill to you, Thomas; but is that sufficient reason for our leaving our native country for good and all? Dr. Stockmann. If we went to another town, do you suppose we should not find the common people just as insolent as they are here? Depend upon it, there is not much to choose between them. Oh, well, let the curs snap—that is not the worst part of it. The worst is that, from one end of this country to the other, every man is the slave of his Party. Although, as far as that goes, I dare say it is not much better in the free West either; the compact majority, and liberal public opinion, and all that infernal old bag of tricks are probably rampant there too. But there things are done on a larger scale, you see. They may kill you, but they won’t put you to death by slow torture. They don’t squeeze a free man’s soul in a vise, as they do here. And, if need be, one can live in solitude. (Walks up and down.) If only I knew where there was a virgin forest or a small South Sea island for sale, cheap— Mrs. Stockmann. But think of the boys, Thomas. Dr. Stockmann (standing still). What a strange woman you are, Katherine! Would you prefer to have the boys grow up in a society like this? You saw for yourself last night that half the population are out of their minds; and if the other half have not lost their senses, it is because they are mere brutes, with no sense to lose. Mrs. Stockmann. But, Thomas dear, the imprudent things you said had something to do with it, you know. Dr. Stockmann. Well, isn’t what I said perfectly true? Don’t they turn every idea topsy-turvy? Don’t they make a regular hotchpotch of right and wrong? Don’t they say that the things I know are true, are lies? The craziest part of it all is the fact of these “liberals,” men of full age, going about in crowds imagining that they are the broadminded party! Did you ever hear anything like it, Katherine! Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, yes, it’s mad enough of them, certainly; but—(petra comes in from the sitting room). Back from school already? Petra. Yes. I have been given notice of dismissal. Mrs. Stockmann. Dismissal? Dr. Stockmann. You too? Petra. Mrs. Busk gave me my notice; so I thought it was best to go at once. Dr. Stockmann. You were perfectly right, too! Mrs. Stockmann. Who would have thought Mrs. Busk was a woman like that! Petra. Mrs. Busk isn’t a bit like that, mother; I saw quite plainly how it hurt her to do it. But she didn’t dare do otherwise, she said; and so I got my notice. Dr. Stockmann (laughing and rubbing his hands). She didn’t dare do otherwise, either! It’s delicious! Mrs. Stockmann. Well, after the dreadful scenes last night— Petra. It was not only that. Just listen to this, father! Dr. Stockmann. Well? Petra. Mrs. Busk showed me no less than three letters she received this morning— Dr. Stockmann. Anonymous, I suppose? Petra. Yes. Dr. Stockmann. Yes, because they didn’t dare to risk signing their names, Katherine! Petra. And two of them were to the effect that a man, who has been our guest here, was declaring last night at the Club that my views on various subjects are extremely emancipated— Dr. Stockmann. You did not deny that, I hope? Petra. No, you know I wouldn’t. Mrs. Busk’s own views are tolerably emancipated, when we are alone together; but now that this report about me is being spread, she dare not keep me on any longer. Mrs. Stockmann. And some one who had been a guest of ours! That shows you the return you get for your hospitality Thomas! Dr. Stockmann. We won’t live in such a disgusting hole any longer. Pack up as quickly as you can, Katherine; the sooner we can get away, the better. Mrs. Stockmann. Be quiet—I think I hear someone in the hall. See who it is, Petra. Petra (opening the door). Oh, it’s you, Captain Horster! Do come in. Horster (coming in). Good morning. I thought I would just come in and see how you were. Dr. Stockmann (shaking his hand). Thanks—that is really kind of you. Mrs. Stockmann. And thank you, too, for helping us through the crowd, Captain Horster. Petra. How did you manage to get home again? Horster. Oh, somehow or other. I am fairly strong, and there is more sound than fury about these folk. Dr. Stockmann. Yes, isn’t their swinish cowardice astonishing? Look here, I will show you something! There are all the stones they have thrown through my windows. Just look at them! I’m hanged if there are more than two decently large bits of hardstone in the whole heap; the rest are nothing but gravel—wretched little things. And yet they stood out there bawling and swearing that they would do me some violence; but as for doing anything—you don’t see much of that in this town. Horster. Just as well for you this time, doctor! Dr. Stockmann. True enough. But it makes one angry all the same; because if some day it should be a question of a national fight in real earnest, you will see that public opinion will be in favor of taking to one’s heels, and the compact majority will turn tail like a flock of sheep, Captain Horster. That is what is