continue..
the “main artery of the town’s lifeblood,” the “nerve center of our town,” and the devil knows what else— Billing. “The town’s pulsating heart” was the expression I once used on an important occasion— Dr. Stockmann. Quite so. Well, do you know what they really are, these great, splendid, much-praised Baths, that have cost so much money—do you know what they are? Hovstad. No, what are they? Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, what are they? Dr. Stockmann. The whole place is a pesthouse! Petra. The Baths, father? Mrs. Stockmann (at the same time). Our Baths! Hovstad. But, Doctor— Billing. Absolutely incredible! Dr. Stockmann. The whole Bath establishment is a whited, poisoned sepulcher, I tell you—the gravest possible danger to the public health! All the nastiness up at Mölledal, all that stinking filth, is infecting the water in the conduit pipes leading to the reservoir; and the same cursed, filthy poison oozes out on the shore too— Horster. Where the bathing place is? Dr. Stockmann. Just there. Hovstad. How do you come to be so certain of all this, Doctor? Dr. Stockmann. I have investigated the matter most conscientiously. For a long time past I have suspected something of the kind. Last year we had some very strange cases of illness among the visitors—typhoid cases, and cases of gastric fever— Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, that is quite true. Dr. Stockmann. At the time, we supposed the visitors had been infected before they came; but later on, in the winter, I began to have a different opinion; and so I set myself to examine the water, as well as I could. Mrs. Stockmann. Then that is what you have been so busy with? Dr. Stockmann. Indeed I have been busy, Katherine. But here I had none of the necessary scientific apparatus; so I sent samples, both of the drinking water and of the sea water, up to the University, to have an accurate analysis made by a chemist. Hovstad. And have you got that? Dr. Stockmann (showing him the letter). Here it is! It proves the presence of decomposing organic matter in the water—it is full of Infusoria. The water is absolutely dangerous to use, either internally or externally. Mrs. Stockmann. What a mercy you discovered it in time. Dr. Stockmann. You may well say so. Hovstad. And what do you propose to do now, Doctor? Dr. Stockmann. To see the matter put right—naturally. Hovstad. Can that be done? Dr. Stockmann. It must be done. Otherwise the Baths will be absolutely useless and wasted. But we need not anticipate that; I have a very clear idea what we shall have to do. Mrs. Stockmann. But why have you kept this all so secret, dear? Dr. Stockmann. Do you suppose I was going to run about the town gossiping about it, before I had absolute proof? No, thank you. I am not such a fool. Petra. Still, you might have told us— Dr. Stockmann. Not a living soul. But tomorrow you may run round to the old “Badger”— Mrs. Stockmann. Oh, Thomas! Thomas! Dr. Stockmann. Well, to your grandfather, then. The old boy will have something to be astonished at! I know he thinks I am cracked—and there are lots of other people think so too, I have noticed. But now these good folks shall see—they shall just see—! (Walks about, rubbing his hands.) There will be a nice upset in the town, Katherine; you can’t imagine what it will be. All the conduit pipes will have to be relaid. Hovstad (getting up). All the conduit pipes—? Dr. Stockmann. Yes, of course. The intake is too low down; it will have to be lifted to a position much higher up. Petra. Then you were right after all. Dr. Stockmann. Ah, you remember, Petra—I wrote opposing the plans before the work was begun. But at that time no one would listen to me. Well, I am going to let them have it, now! Of course I have prepared a report for the Baths Committee; I have had it ready for a week, and was only waiting for this to come. (Shows the letter.) Now it shall go off at once. (Goes into his room and comes back with some papers.) Look at that! Four closely written sheets!—and the letter shall go with them. Give me a bit of paper, Katherine—something to wrap them up in. That will do! Now give it to—to—(stamps his foot)—what the deuce is her name?—give it to the maid, and tell her to take it at once to the Mayor. mrs. stockmann takes the packet and goes out through the dining room . Petra. What do you think uncle Peter will say, father? Dr. Stockmann. What is there for him to say? I should think he would be very glad that such an important truth has been brought to light. Hovstad. Will you let me print a short note about your discovery in the “Messenger”? Dr. Stockmann. I shall be very much obliged if you will. Hovstad. It is very desirable that the public should be informed of it without delay. Dr. Stockmann. Certainly. Mrs. Stockmann (coming back). She has just gone with it. Billing. Upon my soul, Doctor, you are going to be the foremost man in the town! Dr. Stockmann (walking about happily). Nonsense! As a matter of fact I have done nothing more than my duty. I have only made a lucky find—that’s all. Still, all the same— Billing. Hovstad, don’t you think the town ought to give Dr. Stockmann some sort of testimonial? Hovstad. I will suggest it, anyway. Billing. And I will speak to Aslaksen about it. Dr. Stockmann. No, my good friends, don’t let us have any of that nonsense. I won’t hear of anything of the kind. And if the Baths Committee should think of voting me an increase of salary, I will not accept it. Do you hear, Katherine?—I won’t accept it. Mrs. Stockmann. You are quite right, Thomas. Petra (lifting her glass). Your health, father! Hovstad and Billing. Your health, Doctor! Good health! Horster (touches glasses with dr. stockmann). I hope it will bring you nothing but good luck. Dr. Stockmann. Thank you, thank you, my dear fellows! I feel tremendously happy! It is a splendid thing for a man to be able to feel that he has done a service to his native town and to his fellow citizens. Hurrah, Katherine! He puts his arms round her and whirls her round and round, while she protests with laughing cries. They all laugh, clap their hands, and cheer the doctor . The boys put their heads in at the door to see what is going on.