Work: The Emperor Jones Field: emperor jones Author: Eugene O'Neill Title: SCENE VI A cleared space in the forest. The limbs of the trees meet over it forming a low ceiling about five feet from the ground. The inter locked ropes of creepers reaching upward to entwine the tree trunks give an arched appearance to the sides. The space thus en closed is like the dark, noisome hold of some ancient vessel. The moonlight is almost completely shut out and only a vague wan light filters through. There is the noise of someone approaching from the left, stumbling and crawling through the undergrowth. jones ’ voice is heard between chattering moans . Oh, Lawd, what I gwine do now? Ain’t got no bullet left on’y de silver one. If mo’ o’ dem ha’nts come after me, how I gwine skeer dem away? Oh, Lawd, on’y de silver one left—an’ I gotta save dat fo’ luck. If I shoots dat one I’m a goner sho’! Lawd, it’s black heah! Whar’s de moon? Oh, Lawd, don’t dis night evah come to an end! (By the sounds, he is feeling his way cautiously forward) Dere! Dis feels like a clear space. I gotta lie down an’ rest. I don’t care if dem niggers does cotch me. I gotta rest. He is well forward now where his figure can be dimly made out. His pants have been so torn away that what is left of them is no better than a breech cloth. He flings himself full length, face downward on the ground, panting with exhaustion. Gradually it seems to grow lighter in the enclosed space and two rows of seated figures can be seen behind jones . They are sitting in crumpled, despairing atti tudes, hunched, facing one another with their backs touching the forest walls as if they were shackled to them. All are Negroes, naked save for loin cloths. At first they are silent and motionless. Then they begin to sway slowly forward toward each other and back again in unison, as if they were laxly letting themselves follow the long roll of a ship at sea. At the same time, a low, melancholy murmur rises among them, increasing gradually by rhythmic degrees, which seem to be directed and controlled by the throb of the tom-tom in the distance, to a long, tremulous wail of despair that reaches a cer tain pitch, unbearably acute, then falls by slow gradations of tone into silence and is taken up again. jones starts, looks up, sees the figures, and throws himself down again to shut out the sight . A shud der of terror shakes his whole body as the wail rises up about him again. But the next time, his voice, as if under some uncanny com pulsion, starts with the others. As their chorus lifts he rises to a sitting posture similar to the others, swaying back and forth. His voice reaches the highest pitch of sorrow, of desolation. The light fades out, the other voices cease, and only darkness is left. jones can be heard scrambling to his feet and running off, his voice sinking down the scale and receding as he moves farther and farther away in the forest . The tom-tom beats louder, quicker, with a more in sistent, triumphant pulsation.