Work: The Doctor in Spite of Himself Field: doctor in spite of himself Author: Molière Title: ACT II Title: SCENE I Valere. Yes, Sir, I believe you will be satisfied; for we have brought you the greatest physician in the world. Lucas. Adzsooks, none can be better; all the others be not worthy to clean his shoes for’n. Valere. ’Tis one who has done marvellous cures. Lucas. Who has healed folk that were dead. Valere. He’s a little whimsical as I told you; and i’faith there are times when his senses give him the slip, and he does not appear to be what he is. Lucas. Yes, a loves to play the wag, and foith they do say, no offence, that a have had a small knock o’ the crown with an axe. Valere. But he’s all skill at the bottom; and he often says things extremely sublime. Lucas. When a gives his mind to’t, a talks as vine exactly as tho’f a read in a book. Valere. His reputation is already spread round here; and all the world come to him. Géronte. I’ve a vast desire to see him; bring him to me immediately. Valere. I’ll go look for him. Title: SCENE II Jacqueline. By my trath, zir, this will do just what the others ha’ done. I’se believe that he’ll be so good so bad; and the best physician you can gee your daughter, according to my notion, is a good hondsome husband for whom she has a kindness. Géronte. Good lack, my sweet nurse, you meddle with many things. Lucas. Hold your peace, our huswife Jacqueline; it don’t belong to you to thrust in your nose there. Jacqueline. I tell you, and both o’ ye, that all these physicians will do her no more good than a glass of fair water; that your daughter has need o’ somewhat else than rhubarb and zenna; and that a husband’s a plaster which cures all the ailments of young women. Géronte. Is she in a condition now that any one would burthen himself with her with the infirmity she has? And when I had a design of marrying her, did she not oppose my intentions? Jacqueline. I believe so truly, you would a’ given her a mon she doan’t like. Wherefore did not you not offer her this same Mr. Liander, who has gotten her heart? She’d been mighty obediant, and I’ll wager that he’ll take her as she is, if yow’d but give her to him. Géronte. This Leander is not the man she must have; he has not the wealth which the other has. Jacqueline. He has an nuncle that’s mortal rich, whose heritage a is to be. Géronte. All these riches to come appear to me as mere songs. There’s nothing like what people are in possession of; and we run a great risk of being cozened when we reckon up riches which are kept for us by others. Death has not always open ears to the wishes and prayers of your gentlemen inheritors, and they have time to be sharp set who wait for somebody’s decease before they can eat. Jacqueline. In short, I’ve often heard say that in marriage, as in other affairs, contentment is beyond riches. Vathers and mothers ha’ the cursed custom of asking alway what han he, and what han she? And Gaffer Piarre has married his girl Simounetta to fat Tummas, because a had a scrap of a vineyard more than young Robin, where she had placed her liking; and there the poor creature is gone as yallow as a quince, and has gotten nothing all the whoile. This is a foin example for you, zir; folk have nothing but their pleasure in this world; and I should rather choose to gee my girl a good husband, that was agreeable to her, than all the incomes o’ the country. Géronte. Plague! Mrs. Nurse, how you prate! Hold your peace pray; you take too much trouble on you, and will overheat your milk. Lucas (striking géronte on the shoulders at the end of every sentence). S’bobs, hold your tongue, you are an impartinont huswife. Maister ha’ nothing to do with thy preachments; he knows what a mun do. Mind to gee your child the breast, without being so much upon the reasonous. Maister is his daughter’s vather, and he’s a good mon, and a woise one, and knows what to do in the case. Géronte. Oh! Softly, softly. Lucas (striking géronte on the shoulders again). Sir, I’ll mortify her a bit, and learn her the respect she aws you. Géronte. Yes, but these actions are not necessary. Title: SCENE III Valere. Sir, prepare yourself, this is your doctor that’s coming in. Géronte (to sganarel). Sir, I’m transported to see you at my house, for we have great occasion for you. Sganarel (in a physician’s gown, with a high crowned hat). Hippocrates says—let’s both be covered. Géronte. Does Hippocrates say so? Sganarel. Yes. Géronte. In what chapter pray? Sganarel. In his chapter—upon hats. Géronte. Since Hippocrates says so, it must be done. Sganarel. Mr. Doctor, having heard of the wonderful things— Géronte. Who do you speak to, pray? Sganarel. To you. Géronte. I am not a doctor. Sganarel. You are not a doctor? Géronte. No indeed. Sganarel. Seriously? Géronte. Seriously. (sganarel takes a cudgel and beats géronte.) Oh! oh! oh! Sganarel. Now you are a doctor then, I had never any other license. Géronte (to valere). What devil of a fellow have you brought me here? Valere. I told you justly that ’twas a droll doctor. Géronte. Yes, but I shall send him agoing with his drollery. Lucas. Don’t mind this, Maister, ’tis only for a joke. Géronte. This kind of joking does not please me. Sganarel. Sir, I ask pardon for the liberty I’ve taken. Géronte. Sir, your servant. Sganarel. I’m sorry— Géronte. ’Tis nothing at all. Sganarel. For the strokes of the cudgel— Géronte. There’s no harm. Sganarel. Which I’ve had the honour to give you. Géronte. Let us talk no more of that. I have a daughter, Sir, who is fallen into a strange disease. Sganarel. I’m rejoiced, Sir, that your daughter has need of me; and I wish with all my heart that you had the same occasion likewise, you and all your family, that I might manifest the desire I have of serving you. Géronte. I’m obliged to you for your good wishes. Sganarel. I assure you ’tis from the bottom of my soul that I speak it. Géronte. ’Tis too great an honour you do me— Sganarel. What is your daughter’s name? Géronte. Lucinda. Sganarel. Lucinda! Oh! a charming name to act the doctor on! Lucinda! Géronte. I’ll go and see a little what she’s doing. Sganarel. Who is that jolly dame there? Géronte. She’s nurse to a young child of mine. Title: SCENE IV Sganarel (aside). S’life! What a lovely piece of stuff it is! Nurse! Charming nurse, my doctorship is the very humble slave of your nurseship, and I heartily wish I were the happy bantling that sucks the milk of your good graces. (Putting his hand on her bosom.) All my medicines, all my skill, all my capacity is at your service, and— Lucas. With your leave, Mr. Doctor, pray now let alone my wife. Sganarel. What, is she your wife? Lucas. Yes. Sganarel. Hah! I did not know it truly, but am rejoiced at it out of love to you both. (Making as if he would embrace Lucas, embraces the nurse.) Lucas (drawing sganarel away, and stepping between him and his wife). Softly, an you please. Sganarel. I do assure you that I’m overjoyed at your being joined together. I congratulate her on having such a husband as you; and I congratulate you on having so handsome a wife, one so discreet and so well made as she is. (He makes again as if he would embrace lucas, and slipping under his arm, embraces the nurse.) Lucas (drawing him away again). S’bobs, not so many complamants, I beseech ye! Sganarel. Would not you have me rejoice with you for so lovely a conjunction? Lucas. With me as much an you please; but forbear sarimony with my wife. Sganarel. I take an equal part in both your good fortunes; and if I embrace you to witness my joy to you, I embrace her to witness the same to her. (Continuing the same action.) Lucas (drawing him away the third time). ’Sbodikins, Mr. Doctor, what vagaries are here! Title: SCENE V Géronte. Sir, they’ll bring my daughter to you immediately. Sganarel. I attend her, Sir, with all the power of medicine. Géronte. Where is it? Sganarel (touching his forehead). Within here. Géronte. Mighty well. Sganarel. But as I am concerned for all your family, I must make a trial of your nurse’s milk a little, and visit her breast. Lucas (drawing him away, and whisking him round). Nayh, nayh, I doan’t want that to be