continue..
the leg 117, the hand 26, the foot 35. Thus the leg is not so different as it looks at first sight, in its proportion to the spine in the gorilla and in the man—being very slightly shorter than the spine in the former, and between 1/10 and 1/5 longer than the spine in the latter. The foot is longer and the hand much longer in the gorilla; but the great difference is caused by the arms, which are very much longer than the spine in the gorilla, very much shorter than the spine in the man. The question now arises how are the other apes related to the gorilla in these respects—taking the length of the spine, measured in the same way, at 100? In an adult chimpanzee, the arm is only 96, the leg 90, the hand 43, the foot 39—so that the hand and the leg depart more from the human proportion and the arm less, while the foot is about the same as in the gorilla. In the orang, the arms are very much longer than in the gorilla (122), while the legs are shorter (88); the foot is longer than the hand (52 and 48), and both are much longer in proportion to the spine. In the other man-like apes again, the gibbons, these proportions are still further altered; the length of the arms being to that of the spinal column as 19 to 11; while the legs are also a third longer than the spinal column, so as to be longer than in man, instead of shorter. The hand is half as long as the spinal column, and the foot, shorter than the hand, is about 5/11ths of the length of the spinal column. Thus Hylobates is as much longer in the arms than the gorilla, as the gorilla is longer in the arms than man; while, on the other hand, it is as much longer in the legs than the man, as the man is longer in the legs than the gorilla, so that it contains within itself the extremest deviations from the average length of both pairs of limbs. The mandrill presents a middle condition, the arms and legs being nearly equal in length, and both being shorter than the spinal column; while hand and foot have nearly the same proportions to one another and to the spine, as in man. In the spider monkey (Ateles) the leg is longer than the spine, and the arm than the leg; and, finally, in that remarkable lemurine form, the indri (Lichanotus), the leg is about as long as the spinal column, while the arm is not more than 11/18 of its length; the hand having rather less and the foot rather more, than one-third the length of the spinal column. These examples might be greatly multiplied, but they suffice to show that, in whatever proportion of its limbs the gorilla differs from man, the other apes depart still more widely from the gorilla and that, consequently, such differences of proportion can have no ordinal value. We may next consider the differences presented by the trunk, consisting of the vertebral column, or backbone, and the ribs and pelvis, or bony hip-basin, which are connected with it, in man and in the gorilla respectively. In man, in consequence partly of the disposition of the articular surfaces of the vertebrae, and largely of the elastic tension of some of the fibrous bands, or ligaments, which connect these vertebrae together, the spinal column, as a whole, has an elegant S-like curvature, being convex forwards in the neck, concave in the back, convex in the loins, or lumbar region, and concave again in the sacral region; an arrangement which gives much elasticity to the whole backbone, and diminishes the jar communicated to the spine, and through it to the head, by locomotion in the erect position. Furthermore, under ordinary circumstances, man has seven vertebrae in his neck, which are called cervical; twelve succeed these, bearing ribs and forming the upper part of the back, whence they are termed dorsal; five lie in the loins, bearing no distinct, or free, ribs, and are called lumbar; five, united together into a great bone, excavated in front, solidly wedged in between the hip bones, to form the back of the pelvis, and known by the name of the sacrum, succeed these; and finally, three or four little more or less movable bones, so small as to be insignificant, constitute the coccyx or rudimentary tail. In the gorilla, the vertebral column is similarly divided into cervical, dorsal, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal vertebrae, and the total number of cervical and dorsal vertebrae, taken together, is the same as in man; but the development of a pair of ribs to the first lumbar vertebra, which is an exceptional occurrence in man, is the rule in the gorilla; and hence, as lumbar are distinguished from dorsal vertebrae only by the presence or absence of free ribs, the seventeen “dorso-lumbar” vertebrae of the gorilla are divided into thirteen dorsal and four lumbar, while in man they are twelve dorsal and five lumbar. Not only, however, does man occasionally possess thirteen pair of ribs, but the gorilla sometimes has fourteen pairs, while an orangutan skeleton in the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons has twelve dorsal and five lumbar vertebrae, as in man. Cuvier notes the same number in a Hylobates. On the other hand, among the lower apes, many possess twelve dorsal and six or seven lumbar vertebrae; the douroucouli has fourteen dorsal and eight lumbar, and a lemur (Stenops tardigradus) has fifteen dorsal and nine lumbar vertebrae. The vertebral column of the gorilla, as a whole, differs from that of man in the less marked character of its curves, especially in the slighter convexity of the lumbar region. Nevertheless, the curves are present, and are quite obvious in young skeletons of the gorilla and chimpanzee which have been prepared without removal of the ligaments. In young orangs similarly preserved on the other hand, the spinal column is either straight, or even concave forwards, throughout the lumbar region. Whether we take these characters then, or such minor ones as those which are derivable from the proportional length of the spines of the cervical vertebrae, and the like, there is no doubt whatsoever as to the marked difference between man and the gorilla; but there is as little, that equally marked differences, of the very same order, obtain between the gorilla and the lower apes. The pelvis, or bony girdle of the hips, of man is a strikingly human part of his organization; the expanded haunch bones affording support for his viscera during his habitually erect posture, and giving space for the attachment of the great muscles which enable him to assume and to preserve that attitude. In these respects the pelvis of the gorilla differs very considerably from his (Fig. 5). But go no lower than the gibbon, and see how vastly more he differs from the gorilla than the latter does from man, even in this structure. Look at the flat, narrow haunch-bones—the long and narrow passage—the coarse, outwardly curved, ischiatic prominences on which the gibbon habitually rests, and which are coated by the socalled “callosities,” dense patches of skin, wholly absent in the gorilla, in the chimpanzee, and in the orang, as in man! In the lower monkeys and in the lemurs the difference becomes more striking still, the pelvis acquiring an altogether quadrupedal character. But now let us turn to a nobler and more characteristic organ—that by which the human frame seems to be, and indeed is, so strongly distinguished from all others—I mean the skull. The differences between a gorilla’s skull and a man’s are truly immense (Fig. 6). In the former, the face, formed largely by the massive jaw-bones, predominates over the brain-case, or cranium proper: in the latter, the proportions of the two are reversed. In the man, the occipital foramen, through which passes the great nervous cord connecting the brain with the nerves of the body, is placed just behind the centre of the base of the skull, which thus becomes evenly balanced in the erect posture; in the gorilla, it lies in the posterior third of that base. In the man, the surface of the skull is comparatively smooth, and the supraciliary ridges or brow prominences usually project but little—while, in the gorilla, vast crests are developed upon the skull, and the brow ridges overhang the cavernous orbits, like great penthouses. Sections of the skulls, however, show that some of the apparent defects of the gorilla’s cranium arise, in fact, not so much from deficiency of brain-case as from excessive development of the parts of the face. The cranial cavity is not ill-shaped, and the forehead is not truly flattened or very retreating, its really well-formed curve being simply disguised by the mass of bone which is built up against it (Fig. 6). But the roofs of the