continue..
Couldn’t I steal off? Joseph Surface. Keep close, my angel! Sir Peter (peeping out). Joseph, tax him home. Joseph Surface. Back, my dear friend! Lady Teazle (peeping). Couldn’t you lock Sir Peter in? Joseph Surface. Be still, my life! Sir Peter (peeping). You’re sure the little milliner won’t blab? Joseph Surface. In, in, my dear Sir Peter!—’Fore gad, I wish I had a key to the door. Enter charles surface. Charles Surface. Hollo! brother, what has been the matter? Your fellow would not let me up at first. What! have you had a Jew or a wench with you? Joseph Surface. Neither, brother, I assure you. Charles Surface. But what has made Sir Peter steal off? I thought he had been with you. Joseph Surface. He was, brother; but, hearing you were coming, he did not choose to stay. Charles Surface. What! was the old gentleman afraid I wanted to borrow money of him! Joseph Surface. No, sir: but I am sorry to find, Charles, that you have lately given that worthy man grounds for great uneasiness. Charles Surface. Yes, they tell me I do that to a great many worthy men. But how so, pray? Joseph Surface. To be plain with you, brother, he thinks you are endeavouring to gain Lady Teazle’s affections from him. Charles Surface. Who, I? O lud! not I, upon my word. Ha! ha! ha! so the old fellow has found out that he has got a young wife, has he?—or, what’s worse, has her ladyship discovered that she has an old husband? Joseph Surface. This is no subject to jest on, brother. He who can laugh— Charles Surface. True, true, as you were going to say—then, seriously, I never had the least idea of what you charge me with, upon my honour. Joseph Surface. Well, it will give Sir Peter great satisfaction to hear this. (Aloud.) Charles Surface. To be sure, I once thought the lady seemed to have taken a fancy to me; but, upon my soul, I never gave her the least encouragement. Besides, you know my attachment to Maria. Joseph Surface. But sure, brother, even if Lady Teazle had betrayed the fondest partiality for you— Charles Surface. Why, look’ee, Joseph, I hope I shall never deliberately do a dishonourable action—but if a pretty woman were purposely to throw herself in my way—and that pretty woman married to a man old enough to be her father— Joseph Surface. Well! Charles Surface. Why, I believe I should be obliged to borrow a little of your morality, that’s all. But, brother, do you know now that you surprise me exceedingly, by naming me with Lady Teazle; for, faith, I always understood you were her favourite. Joseph Surface. Oh, for shame, Charles! This retort is foolish. Charles Surface. Nay, I swear I have seen you exchange such significant glances— Joseph Surface. Nay, nay, sir, this is no jest— Charles Surface. Egad, I’m serious! Don’t you remember—one day, when I called here— Joseph Surface. Nay, prithee, Charles— Charles Surface. And found you together— Joseph Surface. Zounds, sir, I insist— Charles Surface. And another time, when your servant— Joseph Surface. Brother, brother, a word with you!—(Aside.) Gad, I must stop him. Charles Surface. Informed me, I say, that— Joseph Surface. Hush! I beg your pardon, but Sir Peter has overheard all we have been saying—I knew you would clear yourself, or I should not have consented. Charles Surface. How, Sir Peter! Where is he? Joseph Surface. Softly, there! (Points to the closet.) Charles Surface. Oh, ’fore heaven, I’ll have him out.—Sir Peter, come forth! Joseph Surface. No, no— Charles Surface. I say, Sir Peter, come into court. (Pulls in sir peter.) What! my old guardian!—What—turn inquisitor, and take evidence, incog? Sir Peter. Give me your hand, Charles—I believe I have suspected you wrongfully—but you mustn’t be angry with Joseph—’twas my plan! Charles Surface. Indeed! Sir Peter. But I acquit you. I promise you I don’t think near so ill of you as I did. What I have heard has given me great satisfaction. Charles Surface. Egad, then, ’twas lucky you didn’t hear any more. Wasn’t it, Joseph? (Half aside.) Sir Peter. Ah! you would have retorted on him. Charles Surface. Aye, aye, that was a joke. Sir Peter. Yes, yes, I know his honour too well. Charles Surface. But you might as well have suspected him as me in this matter, for all that. Mightn’t he, Joseph? (Half aside.) Sir Peter. Well, well, I believe you. Joseph Surface. Would they were both out of the room! (Aside.) Sir Peter. And in future, perhaps, we may not be such strangers. Enter servant who whispers joseph surface. Joseph Surface. Lady Sneerwell!—stop her by all means—(Exit servant.) Gentlemen—I beg pardon—I must wait on you downstairs—here’s a person come on particular business. Charles Surface. Well, you can see him in another room. Sir Peter and I haven’t met a long time, and I have something to say to him. Joseph Surface. They must not be left together. I’ll send Lady Sneerwell away, and return directly.—(Aside.) Sir Peter, not a word of the French milliner. (Exit joseph surface.) Sir Peter. Oh! not for the world!—Ah, Charles, if you associated more with your brother, one might indeed hope for your reformation. He is a man of sentiment. Well, there is nothing in the world so noble as a man of sentiment! Charles Surface. Pshaw! he is too moral by half, and so apprehensive of his good name, as he calls it, that I suppose he would as soon let a priest into his house as a girl. Sir Peter. No, no—come, come—you wrong him. No, no, Joseph is no rake, but he is not such a saint in that respect either—I have a great mind to tell him—we should have a laugh! (Aside.) Charles Surface. Oh, hang him! he’s a very anchorite, a young hermit! Sir Peter. Hark’ee—you must not abuse him; he may chance to hear of it again, I promise you. Charles Surface. Why, you won’t tell him? Sir Peter. No—but—this way.—(Aside.) Egad, I’ll tell him.—Hark’ee, have you a mind to have a good laugh at Joseph? Charles Surface. I should like it of all things. Sir Peter. Then, i’faith, we will!—I’ll be quit with him for discovering me. (Aside.)—He had a girl with him when I called. Charles Surface. What! Joseph? you jest. Sir Peter. Hush!—a little—French milliner—and the best of the jest is— she’s in the room now. Charles Surface. The devil she is! Sir Peter. Hush! I tell you. (Points to the screen.) Charles Surface. Behind the screen! ’Slife, let’s unveil her! Sir Peter. No, no, he’s coming: you shan’t, indeed! Charles Surface. Oh, egad, we’ll have a peep at the little milliner! Sir Peter. Not for the world! Joseph will never forgive me. Charles Surface. I’ll stand by you— Sir Peter. (Struggling with Charles.) Odds, here he is! joseph surface enters just as charles throws down the screen. Charles Surface. Lady Teazle, by all that’s wonderful! Sir Peter. Lady Teazle, by all that’s horrible! Charles Surface. Sir Peter, this is one of the smartest French milliners I ever saw. Egad, you seem all to have been diverting yourselves here at hide and seek—and I don’t see who is out of the secret. Shall I beg your ladyship to inform me?—Not a word!—Brother, will you please to explain this matter? What! Morality dumb too!—Sir Peter, though I found you in the dark, perhaps you are not so now! all mute! Well—though I can make nothing of the affair, I suppose you perfectly understand one another; so I’ll leave you to yourselves. (Going.) Brother, I’m sorry to find you have given that worthy man so much uneasiness. Sir Peter! there’s nothing in the world so noble as a man of sentiment! (Exit charles.) They stand for some time looking at each other. Joseph Surface. Sir Peter—notwithstanding I confess that appearances are against me—if you will afford me your patience—I make no doubt but I shall explain everything to your satisfaction. Sir Peter. If you please— Joseph Surface. The fact is, sir, that Lady Teazle, knowing my pretensions to your ward Maria—I say, sir, Lady Teazle, being apprehensive of the jealousy of your temper—and knowing my friendship to the family—she, sir, I say—called here—in order that—I might explain those pretensions—but on your coming—being apprehensive —as I said—of your jealousy—she withdrew—and this, you may depend on’t is the whole truth of the matter. Sir Peter. A very clear account, upon my word; and I dare swear the lady will vouch for every article of it. Lady Teazle (coming forward). For not one word of it, Sir Peter! Sir Peter. How! don’t you think it worth while to agree in the lie? Lady Teazle. There is not one syllable of truth in what that gentleman has told you. Sir Peter. I believe you, upon my soul, ma’am! Joseph Surface (aside). ’Sdeath, madam, will you betray me? Lady Teazle. Good Mr. Hypocrite, by