continue..
mathematics. For one thing, everybody knows its meaning: i.e., square root, cube root, fourth root, fifth root, etc. Combining a word previously defined with this one, we might say that the extraction of a root is the evolution of a radical. The square root of 9 is 3; the square root of 10 is greater than 3, and the most famous and the simplest of all square roots, the first incommensurable number discovered by the Greeks, the square root of 2, is 1.414…. There are also composite radicals—expressions like The symbol for a radical is not the hammer and sickle, but a sign three or four centuries old, and the idea of the mathematical radical is even older than that. The concept of the “hyperradical,” or “ultraradical,” which means something higher than a radical, but lower than a transcendental, is of recent origin. It has a symbol which we shall see in a moment. First, we must say a few words about radicals in general. There are certain numbers and functions in mathematics which are not expressible in the language of radicals and which are generally not well understood. Many ideas for which there are no concrete or diagrammatic representations are difficult to explain. Most people find it impossible to think without words; it is necessary to give them a word and a symbol to pin their attention. Hyperradical or ultra-radical, for which hitherto there have been neither words, nor symbols, fall into this category. We first meet these ultraradicals, not in Mexico City, but in trying to solve equations of the fifth degree. The Egyptians solved equations of the first degree perhaps 4,000 years ago. That is, they found that the solution of the equation ax+b=0, which is represented in geometry by a straight line, is . The quadratic equation ax+bx+c=0 was solved by the Hindus and the Arabs with the formula . The various conic sections, the circle, the ellipse, the parabola, and the hyperbola, are the geometric pictures of quadratic equations in two variables. Then in the sixteenth century the Italians solved the equations of third and fourth degree, obtaining long formulas involving cube roots and square roots. So that by the year 1550, a few years before Shakespeare was born, the equation of the first, second, third, and fourth degrees had been solved. Then there was a delay of 250 years, because mathematicians were struggling with the equation of the fifth degree—the general quintic. Finally, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, Ruffini and Abel showed that equations of the fifth degree could not be solved with radicals. The general quintic is thus not like the general quadratic, cubic or biquadratic. Nevertheless, it presents a problem in algebra which theoretically can be solved by algebraic operations. Only, these operations are so hard that they cannot be expressed by the symbols for radicals. These new higher things are named “ultraradicals,” and they too have their special symbols. With such symbols combined with radicals, we can solve equations of the fifth degree. For example, the solution of x+x=a may be written . The usefulness of the special symbol and name is apparent. Without them the solution of the quintic equation could not be compactly expressed. We may now give a few ideas somewhat easier than those with which we have thus far occupied ourselves. These ideas were presented some time ago to a number of children in kindergarten. It was amazing how well they understood everything that was said to them. Indeed, it is a fair inference that kindergarten children can enjoy lectures on graduate mathematics as long as the mathematical concepts are clearly presented. It was raining and the children were asked how many raindrops would fall on New York. The highest answer was 100. They had never counted higher than 100 and what they meant to imply when they used that number was merely something very, very big—as big as they could imagine. They were asked how many raindrops hit the roof, and how many hit New York, and how many single raindrops hit all of New York in 24 hours. They soon got a notion of the bigness of these numbers even though they did not know the symbols for them. They were certain in a little while that the number of raindrops was a great deal bigger than a hundred. They were asked to think of the number of grains of sand on the beach at Coney Island and decided that the number of grains of sand and the number of raindrops were about the same. But the important thing is that they realized that the number was finite, not infinite. In this respect they showed their distinct superiority over many scientists who to this day use the word infinite when they mean some big number, like a billion billion. Counting, something such scientists evidently do not realize, is a precise operation. It may be wonderful but there is nothing vague or mysterious about it. If you count something, the answer you get is either perfect or all wrong; there is no half way. It is very much like catching a train. You either catch it or you miss it, and if you miss it by a split second you might as well have come a week late. There is a famous quotation which illustrates this: Oh, the little more, and how much it is! And the little less, and what worlds away! A big number is big, but it is definite and it is finite. Of course in poetry, the finite ends with about three thousand; any greater number is infinite. In many poems, the poet will talk to you about the infinite number of stars. But, if ever there was a hyperbole, this is it, for nobody, not even the poet, has ever seen more than three thousand stars on a clear night, without the aid of a telescope. With the Hottentots, infinity begins at three. Ask a Hottentot how many cows he owns, and if he has more than three he’ll say “many.” The number of raindrops falling on New York is also “many.” It is a large finite number, but nowhere near infinity. Now here is the name of a very large number: “Googol.” Most people would say, “A googol is so large that you cannot name it or talk about it; it is so large that it is infinite.” Therefore, we shall talk about it, explain exactly what it is, and show that it belongs to the very same family as the number 1. A googol is this number which one of the children in the kindergarten wrote on the blackboard: 1000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000. The definition of a googol is: 1 followed by a hundred zeros. It was decided, after careful mathematical researches in the kindergarten, that the number of raindrops falling on New York in 24 hours, or even in a year or in a century, is much less than a googol. Indeed, the googol is a number just larger than the largest numbers that are used in physics or astronomy. All those numbers require less than a hundred zeros. This information is, of course, available to everyone, but seems to be a great secret in many scientific quarters. A very distinguished scientific publication recently came forth with the revelation that the number of snow crystals necessary to form the ice age was a billion to the billionth power. This is very startling and also very silly. A billion to the billionth power looks like this: 1000000000. A more reasonable estimate and a somewhat smaller number would be 10. As a matter of fact, it has been estimated that if the entire universe, which you will concede is a trifle larger than the earth, were filled with protons and electrons, so that no vacant space remained, the total number of protons and electrons would be 10 (i.e., 1 with 110 zeros after it). Unfortunately, as soon as people talk about large numbers, they run amuck. They seem to be under the impression that since zero equals nothing, they can add as many zeros to a number as they please with practically no serious consequences. We shall have to be a little more careful than that in talking about big numbers. To return to Coney Island, the number of grains of sand on the beach is about 10, or more descriptively, 100000000000000000000. That is a large number, but not as large as the number mentioned by the divorcee in a recent divorce suit who had telephoned that she loved the man “a million billion billion times and eight times around the world.” It was the largest number that she could conceive of, and shows the kind of thing that may be hatched in a love nest. Though people do a great deal of talking, the total output since the beginning of gabble to the present day, including all baby talk, love songs, and Congressional debates, totals about 10. This is ten