Work: The Misanthrope Field: misanthrope Author: Molière Title: ACT II Title: SCENE I Alcestes. Madam, would you have me be plain with you? I am very much dissatisfied with your manner of behaviour: it increases my choler too much when I think of it, and I perceive ’tis necessary we should break with each other. Yes, I should deceive you to talk otherwise; sooner or later we must break, that’s without dispute; and I might promise you the contrary a thousand times, but I should not have it in my power to do it. Célimène. ’Tis in order to scold me then, I perceive, that you were pleased to wait upon me home? Alcestes. I don’t scold; but your humour, madam, opens too easy an access in your heart to the first-comer; one sees too many lovers laying siege to you, and my mind can by no means be reconciled to this. Célimène. Will you needs have me to blame for gaining lovers? Can I hinder people from thinking me handsome? And when they make tender efforts to visit me, ought I to take a stick and beat ’em out o’ doors? Alcestes. No, ’tis not a stick, madam, you want, but a heart less yielding, and less melting at their love tales. I know you are surrounded with charms, go where you will, but the reception you give ’em retains the persons your eyes attract; and that gentleness which offers itself to those who throw down their arms finishes in every heart the work which your charms had begun. The too gay hope you inspire ’em with fixes their assiduous attendance about you; and a complaisance in you something less extensive would drive away that great crowd of admirers. But, however, tell me, madam, by what chance your Clitander has the happiness to please you so much? Upon what fund of merit and sublime virtue do you ground the honour of your esteem? Is it by the long nail he has upon his little finger that he has gained the great esteem with you, which we see him have? Did you surrender, with all the beau monde, to the shining merit of his fair periwig? Or are they his large pantaloons that make you in love with him? Has the huge collection of ribands the knack of charming you? Is it by the allurement of his vast Rhinegrave that he has gained your heart, whilst he was acting the part of your slave? Or has his manner of laughing and his soft tone of voice found the secret of touching you? Célimène. How unjustly do you take umbrage at him! Don’t you very well know why I keep fair with him? That he can interest all his friends in my lawsuit, as he has actually promised me to do? Alcestes. Lose your lawsuit, madam, with firmness of mind, and don’t keep fair with a rival, who is offensive to me. Célimène. But you are grown jealous of all the world. Alcestes. ’Tis because all the world is kindly received by you. Célimène. That’s the very thing which ought to calm that wild spirit of yours, since my complaisance diffuses itself to all; and you would have more room to be offended, should you see me taken up entirely with one. Alcestes. But as to me whom you blame so much for jealousy, what have I more than the rest of them, pray madam? Célimène. The happiness to know that you are beloved. Alcestes. But what room has my inflamed heart to believe that? Célimène. I think that as I have taken the pains to tell you so, a confession of that kind should be sufficient for you. Alcestes. But who shall assure me at the same time that you mayn’t say quite as much, perhaps, to everybody else? Célimène. A pretty, amorous speech this, truly, for a lover to make; and you treat me in a gallant manner here. Well, to remove from you a suspicion of this nature, I here unsay all that I have said; and nothing can deceive you more than yourself. Rest satisfied. Alcestes. S’heart, must I then love you? Oh! could I once again recover this heart o’ mine out o’ your hands, I would bless Heaven for the singular happiness! I make no secret of it, I do all that’s possible to break this cruel attachment of my heart; but my greatest efforts have hitherto done nothing, and ’tis for my sins that I love you thus. Célimène. ’Tis very true, your love for me is unparalleled. Alcestes. Yes, upon that head I can defy all the world. My love is inconceivable, and never, madam, did any man love as I do. Célimène. In good truth, the method of it is entirely new, for you love people to pick a quarrel with ’em; and your passion breaks out only in peevish expressions; never did anybody see such a growling lover. Alcestes. But it only sticks with you whether this chagrin shall vanish; I beg of you, let’s cut short all our debates, let us converse with open heart, and see to put a stop— Title: SCENE II Célimène. What’s the matter? Basque. Acastes is below. Célimène. Well, bid him come up. Title: SCENE III Alcestes. What! can one never have a little private conversation with you? Must one find you always ready to receive company? And can’t you resolve only for one moment to suffer yourself to be denied? Célimène. Would you have me quarrel with him? Alcestes. You have that regard for people, which by no means is agreeable to me. Célimène. He’s a man would never forgive me, should he know that his visits had been troublesome to me. Alcestes. And what signifies that to you, to plague yourself in this manner— Célimène. Lack-a-day! the goodwill of such as he is of importance, and these are a sort of people who have, I don’t know how, usurped the privilege of talking loud at court. One sees they introduce themselves into all conversations; they can do you no good, but they may do you harm; and whatever support one may have besides, one should never embroil one’s self with these very noisy fellows. Alcestes. In short, be the matter as it will, and whatever foundation one goes upon, you always find reasons to entertain all the world; and the precautions of your judgment— Title: SCENE IV Basque. Here’s Clitander too, madam. Alcestes. Mighty right. Célimène. Whither d’ye run? Alcestes. Out o’ doors. Célimène. Stay. Alcestes. What for? Célimène. Stay. Alcestes. I can’t. Célimène. I would have you. Alcestes. I won’t. These conversations do nothing but weary me, and ’tis unreasonable to desire me to endure ’em. Célimène. I say you shall, you shall. Alcestes. No, ’tis impossible for me. Célimène. Well, go, begone, you are at your full liberty. Title: SCENE V Éiante (to célimène). Here are the two marquises a-coming up with us: did anybody tell you of it? Célimène. Yes; chairs here for everybody. (To alcestes.) What, aren’t you gone? Alcestes. No; but I’m resolved, madam, to make you explain your mind, either for them, or for me. Célimène. Hold your tongue. Alcestes. You shall explain yourself this very day. Célimène. You’re out o’ your wits. Alcestes. No, you shall declare yourself. Célimène. Nay— Alcestes. You must take one side or t’other. Célimène. You jest, sure. Alcestes. No, but you must make your choice, I’ve had patience too long. Clitander. Egad, madam, I’m just come from court, where Cleontes appeared at the levee most ridiculously finished out. Has he ne’er a friend to give him the light of a little charitable advice upon his behaviour. Célimène. To say the truth, he loses himself strangely in the world; he carries an air with him wherever he goes that immediately strikes the eye; and when one sees him again, after a short absence, one still finds him more full of his extravagances. Acastes. Egad, if you must talk of extravagant people, I’ve just now been teased by a most tedious one: that reasoner Damon, who kept me, an’t please ye, a full hour out o’ my chaise, in the heat of the sun. Célimène. ’Tis a strange tittle-tattle, and then he has always the art, with a great deal of discourse, of saying nothing to you. There’s never anything in the arguments he holds, and all we hear is nothing but noise. Éliante (to philintes). This is no bad beginning. The conversation takes a fine turn enough against one’s neighbour. Clitander. Timantes, too, is an admirable character, madam! Célimène. ’Tis a mortal, from head to foot, entirely a mystery, who casts a wild glance upon you in passing, and is always busy without anything to do. Everything he utters abounds with grimace; he quite oppresses you by force o’ ceremony; he has ever to break off the conversation, a secret to whisper to you, and that secret is—nothing; he makes a miracle