continue..
week there were people who could name the father, and the farmhouse where the babies were put out to nurse! Lady Sneerwell. Strange, indeed! Crabtree. Matter of fact, I assure you.—O lud! Mr. Surface, pray is it true that your uncle, Sir Oliver, is coming home? Joseph Surface. Not that I know of, indeed, sir. Crabtree. He has been in the East Indias a long time. You can scarcely remember him, I believe. Sad comfort, whenever he returns, to hear how your brother has gone on! Joseph Surface. Charles has been imprudent, sir, to be sure; but I hope no busy people have already prejudiced Sir Oliver against him—he may reform. Sir Benjamin. To be sure he may—for my part I never believed him to be so utterly void of principle as people say—and though he has lost all his friends, I am told nobody is better spoken of by the Jews. Crabtree. That’s true, egad, nephew. If the old Jewry were a ward, I believe Charles would be an alderman; no man more popular there, ’fore gad! I hear he pays as many annuities as the Irish tontine; and that, whenever he’s sick, they have prayers for the recovery of his health in the Synagogue. Sir Benjamin. Yet no man lives in greater splendour. They tell me, when he entertains his friends, he can sit down to dinner with a dozen of his own securities; have a score [of] tradesmen writing in the antechamber, and an officer behind every guest’s chair. Joseph Surface. This may be entertainment to you, gentlemen, but you pay very little regard to the feelings of a brother. Maria. Their malice is intolerable!—Lady Sneerwell, I must wish you a good morning—I’m not very well. (Exit maria.) Mrs. Candour. O dear! she changes colour very much! Lady Sneerwell. Do, Mrs. Candour, follow her—she may want assistance. Mrs. Candour. That I will, with all my soul, ma’am. Poor dear girl! who knows what her situation may be! (Exit mrs. candour.) Lady Sneerwell. ’Twas nothing but that she could not bear to hear Charles reflected on, notwithstanding their difference. Sir Benjamin. The young lady’s penchant is obvious. Crabtree. But, Benjamin, you mustn’t give up the pursuit for that; follow her, and put her into good humour. Repeat her some of your own verses. Come, I’ll assist you. Sir Benjamin. Mr. Surface, I did not mean to hurt you; but depend upon’t your brother is utterly undone. (Going.) Crabtree. O lud, aye! undone as ever man was—can’t raise a guinea. (Going.) Sir Benjamin. And everything sold, I’m told, that was movable. (Going.) Crabtree. I have seen one that was at his house—not a thing left but some empty bottles that were overlooked, and the family pictures, which I believe are framed in the wainscot. (Going.) Sir Benjamin. And I am very sorry to hear also some bad stories against him. (Going.) Crabtree. Oh, he has done many mean things, that’s certain. (Going.) Sir Benjamin. But, however, as he’s your brother— (Going.) Crabtree. We’ll tell you all, another opportunity. (Exeunt crabtree and sir benjamin.) Lady Sneerwell. Ha, ha! ha! ’tis very hard for them to leave a subject they have not quite run down. Joseph Surface. And I believe the abuse was no more acceptable to your ladyship than to Maria. Lady Sneerwell. I doubt her affections are farther engaged than we imagined; but the family are to be here this evening, so you may as well dine where you are, and we shall have an opportunity of observing farther; in the meantime, I’ll go and plot mischief, and you shall study sentiments. (Exeunt.) Title: SCENE II—SIR PETER TEAZLE’shouse Enter sir peter. Sir Peter. When an old bachelor takes a young wife, what is he to expect? ’Tis now six months since Lady Teazle made me the happiest of men—and I have been the miserablest dog ever since that ever committed wedlock! We tift a little going to church, and came to a quarrel before the bells were done ringing. I was more than once nearly choked with gall during the honeymoon, and had lost all comfort in life before my friends had done wishing me joy! Yet I chose with caution—a girl bred wholly in the country, who never knew luxury beyond one silk gown, nor dissipation above the annual gala of a race ball. Yet now she plays her part in all the extravagant fopperies of the fashion and the town, with as ready a grace as if she had never seen a bush nor a grass-plat out of Grosvenor Square! I am sneered at by my old acquaintance—paragraphed in the newspapers. She dissipates my fortune, and contradicts all my humours; yet the worst of it is, I doubt I love her, or I should never bear all this. However, I’ll never be weak enough to own it. Enter rowley. Rowley. Oh! Sir Peter, your servant—how is it with you, sir? Sir Peter. Very bad, Master Rowley, very bad; I meet with nothing but crosses and vexations. Rowley. What can have happened to trouble you since yesterday? Sir Peter. A good question to a married man! Rowley. Nay, I’m sure your lady, Sir Peter, can’t be the cause of your uneasiness. Sir Peter. Why, has anyone told you she was dead? Rowley. Come, come, Sir Peter, you love her, notwithstanding your tempers don’t exactly agree. Sir Peter. But the fault is entirely hers, Master Rowley. I am, myself, the sweetest-tempered man alive, and hate a teasing temper—and so I tell her a hundred times a day. Rowley. Indeed! Sir Peter. Aye; and what is very extraordinary, in all our disputes she is always in the wrong! But Lady Sneerwell, and the set she meets at her house, encourage the perverseness of her disposition. Then, to complete my vexations, Maria, my ward, whom I ought to have the power of a father over, is determined to turn rebel too, and absolutely refuses the man whom I have long resolved on for her husband; meaning, I suppose, to bestow herself on his profligate brother. Rowley. You know, Sir Peter, I have always taken the liberty to differ with you on the subject of these two young gentlemen. I only wish you may not be deceived in your opinion of the elder. For Charles, my life on’t! he will retrieve his errors yet. Their worthy father, once my honoured master, was, at his years, nearly as wild a spark; yet, when he died, he did not leave a more benevolent heart to lament his loss. Sir Peter. You are wrong, Master Rowley. On their father’s death, you know, I acted as a kind of guardian to them both, till their uncle Sir Oliver’s Eastern liberality gave them an early independence; of course, no person could have more opportunities of judging of their hearts, and I was never mistaken in my life. Joseph is indeed a model for the young men of the age. He is a man of sentiment, and acts up to the sentiments he professes; but, for the other, take my word for’t, if he had any grains of virtue by descent, he has dissipated them with the rest of his inheritance. Ah! my old friend, Sir Oliver, will be deeply mortified when he finds how part of his bounty has been misapplied. Rowley. I am sorry to find you so violent against the young man, because this may be the most critical period of his fortune. I came hither with news that will surprise you. Sir Peter. What! let me hear. Rowley. Sir Oliver is arrived, and at this moment in town. Sir Peter. How! you astonish me! I thought you did not expect him this month. Rowley. I did not; but his passage has been remarkably quick. Sir Peter. Egad, I shall rejoice to see my old friend—’tis sixteen years since we met—we have had many a day together; but does he still enjoin us not to inform his nephews of his arrival? Rowley. Most strictly. He means, before it is known, to make some trial of their dispositions. Sir Peter. Ah! There needs no art to discover their merits—however, he shall have his way; but, pray, does he know I am married? Rowley. Yes, and will soon wish you joy. Sir Peter. What, as we drink health to a friend in a consumption! Ah, Oliver will laugh at me—we used to rail at matrimony together—but he has been steady to his text. Well, he must be at my house, though —I’ll instantly give orders for his reception. But, Master Rowley, don’t drop a word that Lady Teazle and I ever disagree. Rowley. By no means. Sir Peter. For I should never be able to stand Noll’s jokes; so I’d have him think, Lord forgive me! that we are a very happy couple. Rowley. I understand you—but then you must be very careful not to differ while he’s in the house with you. Sir Peter. Egad, and