Work: An Enemy of the People Field: enemy of the people Author: Henrik Ibsen Title: ACT IV S cene . A big old-fashioned room in captain horster’s house . At the back folding doors, which are standing open, lead to an anteroom. Three windows in the left-hand wall. In the middle of the opposite wall a platform has been erected. On this is a small table with two candles, a water bottle and glass, and a bell. The room is lit by lamps placed between the windows. In the foreground on the left there is a table with candles and a chair. To the right is a door and some chairs standing near it. The room is nearly filled with a crowd of towns-people of all sorts, a few women and schoolboys being among them. People are still streaming in from the back, and the room is soon filled. 1st Citizen (meeting another). Hullo, Lamstad! You here too? 2nd Citizen. I go to every public meeting, I do. 3rd Citizen. Brought your whistle too, I expect! 2nd Citizen. I should think so. Haven’t you? 3rd Citizen. Rather! And old Evensen said he was going to bring a cowhorn, he did. 2nd Citizen. Good old Evensen! (Laughter among the crowd.) 4th Citizen (coming up to them). I say, tell me what is going on here tonight. 2nd Citizen. Dr. Stockmann is going to deliver an address attacking the Mayor. 4th Citizen. But the Mayor is his brother. 1st Citizen. That doesn’t matter; Dr. Stockmann’s not the chap to be afraid. 3rd Citizen. But he is in the wrong; it said so in the “People’s Messenger.” 2nd Citizen. Yes, I expect he must be in the wrong this time, because neither the Householders’ Association nor the Citizens’ Club would lend him their hall for his meeting. 1st Citizen. He couldn’t even get the loan of the hall at the Baths. 2nd Citizen. No, I should think not. A Man in another part of the crowd. I say—who are we to back up in this? Another Man, beside him. Watch Aslaksen, and do as he does. Billing (pushing his way through the crowd, with a writing case under his arm). Excuse me, gentlemen—do you mind letting me through? I am reporting for the “People’s Messenger.” Thank you very much! (He sits down at the table on the left.) A Workman. Who was that? Second Workman. Don’t you know him? It’s Billing, who writes for Aslaksen’s paper. captain horster brings in mrs. stockmann and petra through the door on the right . ejlif and morten follow them in . Horster. I thought you might all sit here; you can slip out easily from here, if things get too lively. Mrs. Stockmann. Do you think there will be a disturbance? Horster. One can never tell—with such a crowd. But sit down, and don’t be uneasy. Mrs. Stockmann (sitting down). It was extremely kind of you to offer my husband the room. Horster. Well, if nobody else would— Petra (who has sat down beside her mother). And it was a plucky thing to do, Captain Horster. Horster. Oh, it is not such a great matter as all that. hovstad and aslaksen make their way through the crowd . Aslaksen. (going up to horster). Has the Doctor not come yet? Horster. He is waiting in the next room. Movement in the crowd by the door at the back. Hovstad. Look—here comes the Mayor! Billing. Yes, I’m damned if he hasn’t come after all! peter stockmann makes his way gradually through the crowd, bows courteously, and takes up a position by the wall on the left . Shortly afterwards dr. stockmann comes in by the right-hand door . He is dressed in a black frock coat, with a white tie. There is a little feeble applause, which is hushed down. Silence is obtained. Dr. Stockmann (in an undertone). How do you feel, Katherine? Mrs. Stockmann. All right, thank you. (Lowering her voice.) Be sure not to lose your temper, Thomas. Dr. Stockmann. Oh, I know how to control myself. (Looks at his watch, steps on to the platform, and bows.) It is a quarter past—so I will begin. (Takes his manuscript out of his pocket.) Aslaksen. I think we ought to elect a chairman first. Dr. Stockmann. No, it is quite unnecessary. Some of the Crowd. Yes—yes! Peter Stockmann. I certainly think too that we ought to have a chairman. Dr. Stockmann. But I have called this meeting to deliver a lecture, Peter. Peter Stockmann. Dr. Stockmann’s lecture may possibly lead to a considerable conflict of opinion. Voices in the Crowd. A chairman! A chairman! Hovstad. The general wish of the meeting seems to be that a chairman should be elected. Dr. Stockmann (restraining himself). Very well—let the meeting have its way. Aslaksen. Will the Mayor be good enough to undertake the task? Three Men (clapping their hands). Bravo! Bravo! Peter Stockmann. For various reasons, which you will easily understand, I must beg to be excused. But fortunately we have among us a man who I think will be acceptable to you all. I refer to the President of the Householders’ Association, Mr. Aslaksen. Several Voices. Yes—Aslaksen! Bravo Aslaksen! dr. stockmann takes up his manuscript and walks up and down the platform . Aslaksen. Since my fellow citizens choose to entrust me with this duty, I cannot refuse. Loud applause. aslaksen mounts the platform . Billing (writing). “Mr. Aslaksen was elected with enthusiasm.” Aslaksen. And now, as I am in this position, I should like to say a few brief words. I am a quiet and peaceable man, who believes in discreet moderation, and—and—in moderate discretion. All my friends can bear witness to that. Several Voices. That’s right! That’s right, Aslaksen! Aslaksen. I have learned in the school of life and experience that moderation is the most valuable virtue a citizen can possess— Peter Stockmann. Hear, hear! Aslaksen. —And moreover that discretion and moderation are what enable a man to be of most service to the community. I would therefore suggest to our esteemed fellow citizen, who has called this meeting, that he should strive to keep strictly within the bounds of moderation. A Man by the door. Three cheers for the Moderation Society! A Voice. Shame! Several Voices. Sh!—Sh! Aslaksen. No interruptions, gentlemen, please! Does anyone wish to make any remarks? Peter Stockmann. Mr. Chairman. Aslaksen. The Mayor will address the meeting. Peter Stockmann. In consideration of the close relationship in which, as you all know, I stand to the present Medical Officer of the Baths, I should have preferred not to speak this evening. But my official position with regard to the Baths and my solicitude for the vital interests of the town compel me to bring forward a motion. I venture to presume that there is not a single one of our citizens present who considers it desirable that unreliable and exaggerated accounts of the sanitary condition of the Baths and the town should be spread abroad. Several Voices. No, no! Certainly not! We protest against it! Peter Stockmann. Therefore I should like to propose that the meeting should not permit the Medical Officer either to read or to comment on his proposed lecture. Dr. Stockmann (impatiently). Not permit—! What the devil—! Mrs. Stockmann (coughing). Ahem!—ahem! Dr. Stockmann (collecting himself). Very well. Go ahead! Peter Stockmann. In my communication to the “People’s Messenger,” I have put the essential facts before the public in such a way that every fair-minded citizen can easily form his own opinion. From it you will see that the main result of the Medical Officer’s proposals—apart from their constituting a vote of censure on the leading men of the town—would be to saddle the ratepayers with an unnecessary expenditure of at least some thousands of pounds. Sounds of disapproval among the audience, and some catcalls. Aslaksen (ringing his bell). Silence, please, gentlemen! I beg to support the Mayor’s motion. I quite agree with him that there is something behind this agitation started by the Doctor. He talks about the Baths; but it is a revolution he is aiming at—he wants to get the administration of the town put into new hands. No one doubts the honesty of the Doctor’s intentions—no one will suggest that there can be any two opinions as to that. I myself am a believer in self-government for the people, provided it does not fall too heavily on the ratepayers. But that would be the case here; and that is why I will see Dr. Stockmann damned—I beg your pardon—before I go with him in the matter. You can pay too dearly for a thing sometimes; that is my opinion. Loud applause on all sides. Hovstad. I, too, feel called upon to explain my position. Dr. Stockmann’s agitation appeared to be gaining a certain amount of sympathy at first, so I supported it as impartially as I could. But presently we had reason to suspect that we had