continue..
the stimuli generally became a conditioned stimulus. In a combination in which rubbing and cold were employed the former was preponderant as a conditioned stimulus, while the application of cold taken by itself produced an effect hardly perceptible. But if an attempt is made to convert the weaker stimulus separately into a conditioned stimulus it soon acts energetically. If we now apply the two stimuli together, we have before us an increased effect resulting from the summation of stimuli. The following problem had for its object the explanation of what happens to an active conditioned stimulus when a new stimulus is added to it. In the cases that we examined we saw that the action of the previously formed conditioned stimulus was disturbed when a new stimulus of like kind was added to it. A new similar odor inhibited the operation of another odor which was already a conditioned stimulus; a new musical note likewise impeded the action of a note employed as a conditioned stimulus, and just previously applied. It is not without interest, I think, to mention that we started with these experiments with another object in view. We were intending to form a new conditioned reflex with the aid of another conditioned reflex which had been previously formed. We accordingly experimented with combinations of dissimilar stimuli. Researches in this direction are well advanced. We have to discriminate between different cases. Some examples may be given. Scratching (or rubbing with a brush) may be a ready and effective conditioned stimulus. When we add to it the ticking of a metronome, applying both stimuli simultaneously, the scratching immediately loses its efficacy as a stimulant during the first applications (first phase); and this loss extends over some days but returns again, notwithstanding the addition of the metronome, and now our double stimulus has nearly the same effect as the scratching alone (second phase); later, scratching, when applied simultaneously with the metronome, ceases to act and the influence of this double stimulus now comes to an end altogether (third phase). When the glare of an ordinary electric lamp is added to scratching which is a conditioned stimulus, the scratching at first produces exactly the same effect as before when it was without the lamp, but afterwards the combination of scratching and the luminous stimulus ceases to act. Apparently a phenomenon of the same kind was observed when the action of other mechanical stimuli was experimented with instead of the scratching which had been made to play the part of a conditioned stimulus. In the first place, secretion of saliva was caused by pressure with a sharp as well as with a blunt object, but to a less degree than by scratching; on repetition, however, the effect of the pressure stimulus became progressively less, until finally, it altogether disappeared. We may assume that a part of the stimulation by the sharp and blunt objects was identical with scratching, and that this component was responsible for the action of these objects during their first applications. But a part of the action was special; it led in the course of time to a destruction of the influence of the first. In these inhibitions we see the following phenomenon which in all experiments of this kind is regularly repeated. After a conditioned stimulus had been applied together with another one which inhibited its action, the effect of the first one tried alone was greatly weakened, and sometimes even arrested completely. This is either an aftereffect of the inhibiting stimulus which was added, or it is the extinguishing of the conditioned reflex because in the experiment with the added stimulus the conditioned reflex had not been strengthened by the unconditioned reflex. The inhibition of the conditioned reflex is observed also in the converse case. When you have a combination of agents acting as a conditioned stimulus, in which, as has been already stated, one of the agents by itself produces almost no effect, then frequent repetition of the powerfully acting stimulus alone, without the other one, leads to a marked inhibition of its action, almost to the point of its annihilation. The relative magnitudes of all these manifestations of stimulation and inhibition are closely dependent on the conditions under which they originate. The following is an example. We assume that the stimulus of scratching is acting as a conditioned reflex in the following manner: In the first place nothing but scratching was employed for 15 seconds, then acid was poured into the dog’s mouth, scratching being continued up to the end of one minute. If you now apply scratching for a full minute, you get a copious secretion of saliva. Try to keep up this reflex, that is, continue the scratching for a second minute, and only then pour acid into the dog’s mouth. If you do this several times in succession, the effect of the scratching will quickly diminish during the first minute and will ultimately cease altogether. In order that the scratching may regain its efficiency during the first minute, it is only necessary to repeat the experiment several times; indeed, its effect will be even greater than it was in the previous experiments. We have observed a similar course of events also in the exact measurement of the inhibitory effect. Finally, it may be mentioned that the attempt was made to form conditioned reflexes from the traces of the latest remnants or aftereffects, both of a conditioned and of an unconditioned stimulus. This was accomplished by allowing a conditioned stimulus to act for one minute immediately before the unconditioned stimulus, or by even three minutes earlier. There was always an interval of a few seconds to several minutes between the stimuli. In all these cases the conditioned reflex developed. But in the cases in which the conditioned stimulus was applied three minutes before the unconditioned one, and was separated from the latter by an interval of two minutes, we obtained a result which, although quite unexpected and extremely peculiar, always occurred. When scratching, for example, was applied to a certain spot on the skin as a conditioned stimulus, after it became active we found that scratching of any other place also produced an effect; cold or heat applied to the skin, new musical sounds, optical stimuli, and odors—all these had the same effect as the conditioned stimulus. The unusually copious secretion of saliva and the extremely expressive movements of the animal attracted our attention. During the action of the conditioned stimulus the dog behaved exactly as if the acid which served as the unconditioned stimulus had been actually poured into its mouth. It may appear that this phenomenon is of a different order from those with which we have hitherto been occupied. The fact is that in the earlier experiments at least one coincidence of the conditioned stimulus with the unconditioned one was necessary; but in these experiments, phenomena which had never occurred simultaneously with an unconditioned reflex were acting as conditioned stimuli. Here an unquestionable difference naturally comes to light, but at the same time there is seen an essential property of these phenomena which they have in common with the former ones, that is, the existence of an easily excitable point in the central nervous system, to which, as a result of its condition, are directed all the essential stimuli from the external world that affect the cells of the highest parts of the brain. I now bring to a close my cursory and very incomplete summary of the data which have been obtained in this new field of research. Three characteristic features of this subject deeply impress the investigator. In the first place, these phenomena are easily accessible for exact investigation, being in this respect scarcely inferior to the ordinary physiological phenomena. I refer to the ease with which they may be repeated—beyond all expectation—to their uniformity under similar conditions of experimentation, and to the fact that they are suitable for experimental analysis. In the second place, there is the possibility of considering this subject objectively. The introduction of a few subjective considerations which we admitted now and again for purposes of comparison seemed on further reflection to be an act of violence or an affront to a serious intellectual endeavor. In the third place, the subject involves an unusual number of stimulating questions for the investigator. Under what heading is the subject to be classified? To what part of physiology does it correspond? The reply to this question presents no difficulties. It corresponds partly to what was, in former days, the physiology of the special sense organs, and partly to the physiology of the central nervous system. Up to the present time the physiology of the eye, ear, and other receptor organs has been regarded almost exclusively in its subjective aspect; this presented some advantages, but at the same time, of course, limited the range of inquiry. Investigation by the method of conditioned stimuli in higher animals avoids this limitation, and a number of important questions in this field