continue..
ready to obey me? (To éliante and philintes.) You see what an unworthy fondness can do, and I make you both witnesses of my weakness. But to confess the truth to you, this is not all yet, you will see me push this matter even to extremity, show you that we are wrongfully styled wise, and that in all hearts there is still something of the man. (To célimène.) Yes, perfidious creature, I am willing to forget your crimes, and can find in my heart to excuse all your tricks, and cover ’em with the name of a weakness, into which the viciousness of the times has betrayed your youth; provided your heart will second a design I have formed of avoiding all human creatures, and that you are determined to follow me without delay into my desert, where I have made a vow to live. This is the only way you can in every one’s opinion repair the mischief of your letters, and by which, after this discovery, which a noble mind must abhor, I may be allowed still to love you. Célimène. I renounce the world before I grow old, and go bury myself in your desert! Alcestes. And if your flame is answerable to mine, what should all the rest of the world signify to you? Are not your desires satisfied with me? Célimène. Solitude is frightful to a person of twenty; I don’t perceive my soul great or firm enough to resolve upon undertaking a design of that nature. If giving you my hand can satisfy your wishes, I may resolve to tie the knot, and Hymen— Alcestes. No, now my heart detests you, and this refusal alone does more than all the rest. Since you are not so far linked in the charming bondage to find your all in me as I do in you, go, I discard you, and this sensible affront for ever disengages me from your base tyranny. Title: SCENE VIII Alcestes (speaks to éliante). A thousand virtues, madam, adorn your beauty, and I never saw anything in you but what was sincere. I have had for this long time an extreme value for you; but allow me ever to esteem you in the same way. And excuse my heart in the variety of its troubles, if it waives the honour of wearing your chains; I am sensible that I am unworthy of them, and begin to find Heaven has not formed me for this union; that the refuse of a heart which could be of no worth to you would be too mean an homage for you, and that in short— Éliante. You may pursue your thought, my hand is under no embarrassment where to bestow itself. And here is your friend, who without giving myself too much uneasiness, might possibly accept it, should I desire it of him. Philintes. Ah, madam! that honour is my whole ambition, and I could sacrifice my blood and life for it. Alcestes. That you may taste true contentment, may you ever retain these sentiments each for the other. Betrayed on all sides, oppressed with injustice, I am going to escape a gulf where vice reigns triumphant; and to search out some retired corner of the world, where one may have the liberty to be a man of honour. Philintes. Poem ```Come, come, my charmer, let’s exhaust our art, To break this savage purpose of his heart.```