continue..
blockhead—what do you want? Servant. I beg pardon, sir, but I thought you wouldn’t choose Sir Peter to come up without announcing him. Joseph Surface. Sir Peter!—Oons—the devil! Lady Teazle. Sir Peter! O lud! I’m ruined! I’m ruined! Servant. Sir, ’twasn’t I let him in. Lady Teazle. Oh! I’m undone! What will become of me, now, Mr. Logic? —Oh! mercy, he’s on the stairs—I’ll get behind here—and if ever I’m so imprudent again— (Goes behind the screen.) Joseph Surface. Give me that book. (Sits down. servant pretends to adjust his hair.) Enter sir peter teazle. Sir Peter. Aye, ever improving himself!—Mr. Surface, Mr. Surface— Joseph Surface. Oh, my dear Sir Peter, I beg your pardon. (Gaping, and throws away the book.) I have been dozing over a stupid book. Well, I am much obliged to you for this call. You haven’t been here, I believe, since I fitted up this room. Books, you know, are the only things I am a coxcomb in. Sir Peter. ’Tis very neat indeed. Well, well, that’s proper; and you make even your screen a source of knowledge—hung, I perceive, with maps. Joseph Surface. Oh, yes, I find great use in that screen. Sir Peter. I dare say you must—certainly—when you want to find anything in a hurry. Joseph Surface (aside). Aye, or to hide anything in a hurry either. Sir Peter. Well, I have a little private business— Joseph Surface. You needn’t stay. (To servant.) Servant. No, sir. (Exit.) Joseph Surface. Here’s a chair, Sir Peter—I beg— Sir Peter. Well, now we are alone, there is a subject, my dear friend, on which I wish to unburden my mind to you—a point of the greatest moment to my peace: in short, my good friend, Lady Teazle’s conduct of late has made me extremely unhappy. Joseph Surface. Indeed! I am very sorry to hear it. Sir Peter. Yes, ’tis but too plain she has not the least regard for me; but, what’s worse, I have pretty good authority to suspect she must have formed an attachment to another. Joseph Surface. You astonish me! Sir Peter. Yes! and, between ourselves, I think I have discovered the person. Joseph Surface. How! you alarm me exceedingly. Sir Peter. Aye, my dear friend, I knew you would sympathize with me! Joseph Surface. Yes, believe me, Sir Peter, such a discovery would hurt me just as much as it would you. Sir Peter. I am convinced of it. Ah! it is a happiness to have a friend whom one can trust even with one’s family secrets. But have you no guess who I mean? Joseph Surface. I haven’t the most distant idea. It can’t be Sir Benjamin Backbite! Sir Peter. O, no! What say you to Charles? Joseph Surface. My brother! impossible! Sir Peter. Ah, my dear friend, the goodness of your own heart misleads you—you judge of others by yourself. Joseph Surface. Certainly, Sir Peter, the heart that is conscious of its own integrity is ever slow to credit another’s treachery. Sir Peter. True; but your brother has no sentiment—you never hear him talk so. Joseph Surface. Yet I can’t but think Lady Teazle herself has too much principle— Sir Peter. Aye; but what’s her principle against the flattery of a handsome, lively young fellow? Joseph Surface. That’s very true. Sir Peter. And then, you know, the difference of our ages makes it very improbable that she should have any great affection for me; and if she were to be frail, and I were to make it public, why the town would only laugh at me, the foolish old bachelor who had married a girl. Joseph Surface. That’s true, to be sure—they would laugh. Sir Peter. Laugh! aye, and make ballads, and paragraphs, and the devil knows what of me. Joseph Surface. No, you must never make it public. Sir Peter. But then again—that the nephew of my old friend, Sir Oliver, should be the person to attempt such a wrong, hurts me more nearly. Joseph Surface. Aye, there’s the point. When ingratitude barbs the dart of injury, the wound has double danger in it. Sir Peter. Aye—I, that was, in a manner, left his guardian—in whose house he had been so often entertained—who never in my life denied him—my advice! Joseph Surface. Oh, ’tis not to be credited! There may be a man capable of such baseness, to be sure; but, for my part, till you can give me positive proofs, I cannot but doubt it. However, if it should be proved on him, he is no longer a brother of mine! I disclaim kindred with him—for the man who can break through the laws of hospitality, and attempt the wife of his friend, deserves to be branded as the pest of society. Sir Peter. What a difference there is between you! What noble sentiments! Joseph Surface. Yet I cannot suspect Lady Teazle’s honour. Sir Peter. I am sure I wish to think well of her, and to remove all ground of quarrel between us. She has lately reproached me more than once with having made no settlement on her; and, in our last quarrel, she almost hinted that she should not break her heart if I was dead. Now, as we seem to differ in our ideas of expense, I have resolved she shall be her own mistress in that respect for the future; and, if I were to die, she shall find that I have not been inattentive to her interest while living. Here, my friend, are the drafts of two deeds, which I wish to have your opinion on. By one, she will enjoy eight hundred a year independent while I live; and, by the other, the bulk of my fortune after my death. Joseph Surface. This conduct, Sir Peter, is indeed truly generous.— (Aside.) I wish it may not corrupt my pupil. Sir Peter. Yes, I am determined she shall have no cause to complain, though I would not have her acquainted with the latter instance of my affection yet awhile. Joseph Surface. Nor I, if I could help it. (Aside.) Sir Peter. And now, my dear friend, if you please, we will talk over the situation of your hopes with Maria. Joseph Surface (softly). No, no, Sir Peter; another time, if you please. Sir Peter. I am sensibly chagrined at the little progress you seem to make in her affection. Joseph Surface. I beg you will not mention it. What are my disappointments when your happiness is in debate! (Softly.)—’Sdeath, I shall be ruined every way! (Aside.) Sir Peter. And though you are so averse to my acquainting Lady Teazle with your passion, I am sure she’s not your enemy in the affair. Joseph Surface. Pray, Sir Peter, now oblige me. I am really too much affected by the subject we have been speaking on to bestow a thought on my own concerns. The man who is entrusted with his friend’s distresses can never— Enter servant. Well, sir? Servant. Your brother, sir, is speaking to a gentleman in the street, and says he knows you are within. Joseph Surface. ’Sdeath, blockhead—I’m not within—I’m out for the day. Sir Peter. Stay—hold—a thought has struck me—you shall be at home. Joseph Surface. Well, well, let him up. (Exit servant.) He’ll interrupt Sir Peter—however— Sir Peter. Now, my good friend, oblige me, I entreat you. Before Charles comes, let me conceal myself somewhere; then do you tax him on the point we have been talking on, and his answers may satisfy me at once. Joseph Surface. O, fie, Sir Peter! would you have me join in so mean a trick?—to trepan my brother to? Sir Peter. Nay, you tell me you are sure he is innocent; if so, you do him the greatest service by giving him an opportunity to clear himself, and you will set my heart at rest. Come, you shall not refuse me; here, behind the screen will be (Goes to the screen.)—Hey! what the devil! there seems to be one listener here already—I’ll swear I saw a petticoat! Joseph Surface. Ha! ha! ha! Well, this is ridiculous enough. I’ll tell you, Sir Peter, though I hold a man of intrigue to be a most despicable character, yet you know, it doesn’t follow that one is to be an absolute Joseph either! Hark’ee! ’tis a little French milliner, a silly rogue that plagues me—and having some character—on your coming, she ran behind the screen. Sir Peter. Ah, you rogue!—But, egad, she has overheard all I have been saying of my wife. Joseph Surface. Oh, ’twill never go any further, you may depend on’t! Sir Peter. No! then, i’faith, let her hear it out. Here’s a closet will do as well. Joseph Surface. Well, go in then. Sir Peter. Sly rogue! sly rogue! (Goes into the closet.) Joseph Surface. A very narrow escape, indeed! and a curious situation I’m in, to part man and wife in this manner. Lady Teazle (peeping from the screen).