continue..
to him one thing: “Wrong! all that for which thou hast lived, and thou livest, is falsehood, deception, hiding from thee life and death.” And as soon as he expressed this thought, his exasperation returned, and, together with his exasperation, the physical, tormenting agony; and, with the agony, the consciousness of inevitable death close at hand. Something new took place: a screw seemed to turn in him, twinging pain to show through him, and his breathing was constricted. The expression of his face, when he said “yes,” was terrible. After he had said that “yes,” he looked straight into her face, and then, with extraordinary quickness for one so weak, he threw himself on his face and cried: “Go away! go away! leave me!” From that moment began that shriek that did not cease for three days, and was so terrible that, when it was heard two rooms away, it was impossible to hear it without terror. At the moment that he answered his wife, he felt that he was lost, and there was no return, that the end had come, absolutely the end, and the question was not settled, but remained a question. “U! uu! u!” he cried in varying intonations. He began to shriek, “N’ye khotchu—I won’t”; and thus he kept up the cry on the letter u. Three whole days, during which for him there was no time, he struggled in that black sack into which an invisible, invincible power was thrusting him. He fought as one condemned to death fights in the hands of the hangman, knowing that he cannot save himself, and at every moment he felt that, notwithstanding all the violence of his struggle, he was nearer and nearer to that which terrified him. He felt that his suffering consisted, both in the fact that he was being thrust into that black hole, and still more that he could not make his way through into it. What hindered him from making his way through was the confession that his life had been good. This justification of his life caught him, and did not let him advance, and more than all else tormented him. Suddenly some force knocked him in the breast, in the side, still more forcibly compressed his breath; he was hurled through the hole, and there at the bottom of the hole some light seemed to shine on him. It happened to him as it sometimes does on a railway carriage when you think that you are going forward, but are really going backward, and suddenly recognize the true direction. “Yes, all was wrong,” he said to himself; “but that is nothing. I might, I might have done right. What is right?” he asked himself, and suddenly stopped. This was at the end of the third day, two hours before his death. At this very same time the little student noiselessly stole into his father’s room, and approached his bed. The moribund was continually shrieking desperately, and tossing his arms. His hand struck upon the little student’s head. The little student seized it, pressed it to his lips, and burst into tears. It was at this very same time that Ivan Ilyitch fell through, saw the light, and it was revealed to him that his life had not been as it ought, but that still it was possible to repair it. He was just asking himself, “What is right?” and stopped to listen. Then he felt that someone was kissing his hand. He opened his eyes, and looked at his son. He felt sorry for him. His wife came to him. He looked at her. With open mouth, and with her nose and cheeks wet with tears, with an expression of despair, she was looking at him. He felt sorry for her. “Yes, I am a torment to them,” he thought. “I am sorry for them, but they will be better off when I am dead.” He wanted to express this, but he had not the strength to say it. “However, why should I say it? I must do it” He pointed out his son to his wife by a glance, and said: “Take him away…I am sorry…and for thee.” He wanted to say also, “Prosti—Forgive,” but he said, “Propusti—Let it pass”; and, not having the strength to correct himself, he waved his hand, knowing that he would comprehend who had the right. And suddenly it became clear to him that what oppressed him, and was hidden from him, suddenly was lighted up for him all at once, and on two sides, on ten sides, on all sides. He felt sorry for them; he felt that he must do something to make it less painful for them. To free them, and free himself, from these torments, “How good and how simple!” he thought. “But the pain,” he asked himself, “where is it?—Here, now, where art thou, pain?” He began to listen. “Yes, here it is! Well, then, do your worst, pain!” “And death? where is it?” He tried to find his former customary fear of death, and could not. “Where is death? What is it?” There was no fear, because there was no death. In place of death was light! “Here is something like!” he suddenly said aloud. “What joy!” For him all this passed in a single instant, and the significance of this instant did not change. For those who stood by his side, his death agony was prolonged two hours more. In his breast something bubbled up, his emaciated body shuddered. Then more and more rarely came the bubbling and the rattling. “It is all over,” said someone above him. He heard these words, and repeated them in his soul. “It is over! death!” he said to himself. “It does not exist more.” He drew in one more breath, stopped in the midst of it, stretched himself, and died.