Work: The Misanthrope Field: misanthrope Author: Molière Title: ACT I Title: SCENE I Philintes. What’s the matter? What ails you? Alcestes (sitting). Pray leave me. Philintes. But once more tell me, what whim— Alcestes. Leave me, I say, and go hide yourself. Philintes. But you might hear people at least, without being angry. Alcestes. I will be angry, and I won’t hear. Philintes. I can’t comprehend you in your hasty humours; and in short, though a friend, I am one of the first— Alcestes (rising hastily). I, your friend? Strike that out o’ your books. I have hitherto professed myself to be so, but after what I have now discovered in you, I flatly declare to you that I am so no longer; I’ll have no place in corrupt hearts. Philintes. I am guilty then, Alcestes, in your account? Alcestes. Go, you ought to die with mere shame, there’s no excusing such an action, and every man of honour ought to be shocked at it. I see you stifle a man with caresses, and profess the utmost tenderness for him; you overcharge the transport of your embraces with protestations, offers, and oaths; and when I afterwards ask you, who is this man, you scarce can tell me what his name is. Your hot fit’s all over the moment you are parted, and you treat him, to me, as a person absolutely indifferent. S’death! ’tis an unworthy, base, infamous thing, so far to demean oneself as to act contrary to one’s own sentiments. And if, by ill-luck, I had done as much, I should have gone that instant and hanged myself for vexation. Philintes. I don’t see, for my part, that this is a hanging matter, and I shall petition you that you would graciously think fit that I mitigate a little the severity of your sentence, and with your leave, not hang myself for this fact. Alcestes. How awkwardly this raillery sits upon you! Philintes. But seriously, what would you have one do? Alcestes. I would have you be sincere, and, like a man of honour, let no word slip which comes not from the heart. Philintes. When a man comes and embraces you with joy, you should in reason pay him in the same coin, answer his eagerness as one can, return him offer for offer, and oaths for oaths. Alcestes. No, I can’t endure that base method which the generality of your people of mode affect; and I hate nothing so much as the contortions of all those great protestation-mongers, those affable dealers in frivolous embraces, those obliging utterers of empty words, who attack everybody with civilities, and treat the man of worth and the coxcomb with the same air. What good does it do you for a man to caress you, swear amity, faith, zeal, esteem, tenderness, and make a grand eulogium upon you, when he runs to do the same to the first scoundrel he meets? No, no, there’s not a soul of the least good disposition will accept an esteem so prostituted, and the most illustrious will have but a poor relish when one finds one is blended with the whole universe. Esteem is founded on some preference, and to esteem all the world is to esteem nobody. Since you give in to these vices of the times, i’faith you are not calculated to be one of my companions; I refuse the vast complaisance of a heart which makes no difference of merit; I would have people distinguish me; and, to cut the matter short, a friend to all mankind is no friend for me. Philintes. But whilst we are of the world, ’tis necessary that we pay some outward civilities which custom demands. Alcestes. No, I tell ye we ought to chastise, without mercy, that shameful commerce of appearances of friendship. I would have us be men, and think that on all occasions the very bottom of our hearts should show itself in our discourse; that it should be that which speaks, and that our sentiments should never be masked under vain compliments. Philintes. There are a good many occasions in which an absolute frankness would be ridiculous, and hardly be endured; and sometimes, no offence to your austere honour, ’tis right to conceal what we have in our hearts. Would it be proper or decent to tell thousands o’ people what we think of ’em? when we have to do with a man we hate, or who is disagreeable to us, ought we to declare the matter to him, just as it is? Alcestes. Yes. Philintes. What! would you tell the antiquated Emilia that it ill becomes her, at her age, to set up for a beauty? and that the white she lays on so thick is shocking to everybody? Alcestes. Without doubt. Philintes. Or Dorilas, that he’s too impertinent? And that there is not an ear at court which he does not tire in recounting his bravery, and the splendour of his family? Alcestes. Very right. Philintes. You jest sure. Alcestes. I don’t jest; and I shall spare nobody in this point. My eyes are too much offended; neither court nor city present me with anything but objects to provoke my spleen. It throws me into a melancholy humour, a profound chagrin, when I see men converse together in the manner they do; I find nothing anywhere but base flattery, but injustice, interest, treachery, and knavery; I can hold no longer; I’m distracted and have taken up a resolution to break abruptly with all mankind. Philintes. This sour philosopher is a little too savage; I can’t help laughing to see you in these gloomy fits; and methinks I see in us two, who have been brought up together, the two brothers which The School for Husbands describes, of whom… Alcestes. Pray, let’s ha’ done with your insipid comparisons. Philintes. No, truly, leave you off all these rude insults. The world won’t alter its ways, for all your pains, and since frankness has such charms with you, I shall tell you frankly that this distemper o’ yours is as good as a comedy, wherever you go, and that such a mighty wrath against the manners of the age makes you ridiculous with a great many people. Alcestes. So much the better, s’death, so much the better; that’s what I want, ’tis a good sign, and I’m overjoyed at it; all men are to such a degree odious to me that I should be sorry to be wise in their eyes. Philintes. You wish very ill then to human nature? Alcestes. Yes, I have conceived a horrible aversion to it. Philintes. Shall all poor mortals, without any exception, be involved in this aversion? Besides, are there not some in our age— Alcestes. No, ’tis general, and I hate all men. Some, because they are wicked and mischievous; and others, for being complaisant to the wicked, and not having that vigorous hatred for ’em which vice ought to give to all virtuous minds. One sees the unjust excess of this complaisance to that sheer villain with whom I have a lawsuit; the treacherous rascal is plainly seen through his mask; he is everywhere known for what he is; his rolling eyes and soft tone impose only upon strangers. People know that this wretched fellow, who richly deserves the gallows, has pushed himself into the world by dirty jobs, and that the splendid condition these have brought him to makes merit repine and virtue blush; whatever shameful titles persons everywhere give him, his wretched honour sees nobody on its side; call him infamous knave and cursed villain, all the world agrees to’t, and nobody contradicts it. In the meantime his grimace is everywhere welcome, they entertain him, smile upon him, he insinuates himself into all companies; and if there is any rank to be disputed by canvassing, you’ll see him carry it over a man of the greatest worth. Plague! these are to me mortal wounds, to see men keep any measures with vice; I am strongly moved to fly into some desert to avoid all approach of human creatures. Philintes. Lack-a-day! Let us give ourselves less trouble about the manners of the age, and make some small allowances to human nature; let us not examine it with so great rigour, but look upon its defects with some indulgence. This world requires a tractable virtue, one may be blameworthy by stress of wisdom, right reason avoids every extremity, and would have us be wise with sobriety. That great stiffness in the virtues of ancient times too much shocks our age and common usage; it would have mortals too perfect; we must yield to the times without obstinacy, and ’tis an extremity of folly to busy ourselves in correcting the world. I observe, as you do, a thousand things every day which might go better taking another course; but whatever I may discover in every transaction, people don’t see me in a rage, like you. I take