Work: The Queen of Spades Field: queen of spades Author: Alexander Pushkin Title: II Poem ```Society Talk — Il paraît que monsieur est décidément pour les suivantes. — Que voulez-vous, madame? Elles sont plus fraîches. [“It appears, monsieur, that you decidedly favour the lady’s maids.” “Of course, madame; they’re fresher.”]``` The old Countess X. was seated in her dressing-room in front of her looking-glass. Three maids stood around her. One held a small pot of rouge, another a box of hairpins, and the third a tall cap with bright red ribbons. The Countess had no longer the slightest pretensions to beauty—hers had faded long ago—but she still preserved all the habits of her youth, dressed in strict accordance with the fashion of the seventies, and made as long and as careful a toilette as she would have done sixty years previously. Near the window, at an embroidery frame, sat a young lady, her ward. “Good morning, Grand’maman,” said a young officer, entering the room. “Bonjour, Mademoiselle Lise. Grand’maman, I have a favour to ask of you.” “What is it, Paul?” “I want you to let me introduce one of my friends to you, and to allow me to bring him to the ball on Friday.” “Bring him direct to the ball and introduce him to me there. Were you at N.’s yesterday?” “Yes; everything went off very pleasantly, and dancing kept up until five o’clock. How beautiful Mme Yeletzkaya was!” “But, my dear, what is there beautiful about her? You should have seen her grandmother, Princess Darya Petrovna! By the way, she must have aged very much, Princess Darya Petrovna.” “How do you mean, aged?” cried Tomsky thoughtlessly. “She died seven years ago.” The young lady raised her head and made a sign to the young man. He then remembered that the old Countess was never to be informed of the death of any of her contemporaries, and he bit his lip. But the Countess heard the news with the greatest indifference. “Died!” said she. “And I did not know it. We were appointed maids of honour at the same time, and when we were being presented, the Empress…” And the Countess for the hundredth time related the anecdote to her grandson. “Come, Paul,” said she, when she had finished her story, “help me to get up. Lizanka, where is my snuff-box?” And the Countess with her three maids went behind a screen to finish her toilette. Tomsky was left alone with the young lady. “Who is the gentleman you wish to introduce to the Countess?” asked Lizaveta Ivanovna in a whisper. “Narumov. Do you know him?” “No. Is he in the army or is he a civilian?” “In the army.” “Is he in the Engineers?” “No, in the Cavalry. What made you think that he was in the Engineers?” The young lady smiled, but made no reply. “Paul,” cried the Countess, from behind the screen, “send me some new novel, only, pray, not the kind they write nowadays.” “What do you mean, Grand’maman?” “That is, a novel in which the hero strangles neither his father nor his mother, and in which there are no drowned bodies. I have a great horror of them.” “There are no such novels nowadays. Would you like a Russian one?” “Are there any Russian novels? Send me one, my dear, please send me one!” “Good-bye, Grand’maman, I am in a hurry…. Good-bye, Lizaveta Ivanovna. What, then, made you think that Narumov was in the Engineers?” And Tomsky withdrew from the dressing-room. Lizaveta Ivanovna was left alone; she laid aside her work and began to look out of the window. A few moments afterwards, from behind a corner house on the other side of the street, a young officer appeared. A deep blush covered her cheeks; she took up her work again and bent her head over the frame. At the same moment the Countess returned, completely dressed. “Order the carriage, Lizaveta,” said she; “we will go out for a drive.” Lizaveta arose from the frame and began to put away her work. “What is the matter with you, my dear, are you deaf?” cried the Countess. “Order the carriage to be got ready at once.” “I will do so this moment,” replied the young lady, and ran into the ante-room. A servant entered and gave the Countess some books from Prince Pavel Alexandrovich. “Tell him that I am much obliged to him,” said the Countess. “Lizaveta! Lizaveta! Where are you running to?” “I am going to dress.” “There is plenty of time, my dear. Sit down here. Open the first volume and read aloud to me.” Her companion took the book and read a few lines. “Louder,” said the Countess. “What is the matter with you, my dear? Have you lost your voice? Wait—give me that footstool—a little nearer—that will do!” Lizaveta read two more pages. The Countess yawned. “Put the book down,” said she. “What a lot of nonsense! Send it back to Prince Pavel with my thanks…. But where is the carriage?” “The carriage is ready,” said Lizaveta, looking out into the street. “How is it that you are not dressed?” said the Countess. “I must always wait for you. It is intolerable, my dear!” Liza hastened to her room. She had not been there two minutes before the Countess began to ring with all her might. The three maids came running in at one door and the valet at another. “How is it that you don’t come when I ring for you?” said the Countess. “Tell Lizaveta Ivanovna that I am waiting for her.” Lizaveta returned with her hat and cloak on. “At last you are here!” said the Countess. “But why such an elaborate toilette? Whom do you intend to captivate? What sort of weather is it? It seems rather windy.” “No, Your Ladyship, it is very calm,” replied the valet. “You always speak thoughtlessly. Open the window. So it is: windy and bitterly cold. Unharness the horses. Lizaveta, we won’t go out—there was no need for you to deck yourself out like that.” “And that’s my life!” thought Lizaveta. Ivanovna. And, in truth, Lizaveta Ivanovna was a very unfortunate creature. “It is bitter to eat the bread of another,” says Dante, “and hard to climb his stair.” But who can know what the bitterness of dependence is so well as the poor companion of an old lady of quality? The Countess X. had by no means a bad heart, but she was capricious, like a woman who had been spoiled by the world, as well as avaricious and sunk in cold egoism, like all old people who are no longer capable of affection, and whose thoughts are with the past and not the present. She participated in all the vanities of the great world, went to balls, where she sat in a corner, painted and dressed in old-fashioned style, like an ugly but indispensable ornament of the ballroom; the guests on entering approached her and bowed profoundly, as if in accordance with a set ceremony, but after that nobody took any further notice of her. She received the whole town at her house, and observed the strictest etiquette, although she could no longer recognize people. Her numerous domestics, growing fat and old in her antechamber and servants’ hall, did just as they liked, and vied with each other in robbing the moribund old woman. Lizaveta Ivanovna was the martyr of the household. She poured tea, and was reprimanded for using too much sugar; she read novels aloud to the Countess, and the faults of the author were visited upon her head; she accompanied the Countess in her walks, and was held answerable for the weather or the state of the pavement. A salary was attached to the post, but she very rarely received it, although she was expected to dress like everybody else, that is to say, like very few indeed. In society she played the most pitiable role. Everybody knew her, and nobody paid her any attention. At balls she danced only when a partner was wanted, and ladies would only take hold of her arm when it was necessary to lead her out of the room to attend to their dresses. She had a great deal of amour propre [self-esteem], and felt her position keenly, and she looked about her with impatience for a deliverer to come to her rescue; but the young men, calculating in their giddiness, did not condescend to pay her any attention, although Lizaveta Ivanovna was a hundred times prettier than the barefaced and cold-hearted marriageable girls around whom they hovered. Many a time did she quietly slink away from the dull and elegant drawing-room, to go and cry in her own poor little room, in which stood a screen, a chest of drawers, a looking-glass and a painted bedstead, and where a tallow candle burned feebly in a copper candlestick. One morning—this was about two days after the card-party described at the