continue..
tedious and insipid. Maria. Well, I’ll not debate how far scandal may be allowable; but in a man, I am sure, it is always contemptible. We have pride, envy, rivalship, and a thousand motives to depreciate each other; but the male slanderer must have the cowardice of a woman before he can traduce one. Enter servant. Servant. Madam, Mrs. Candour is below, and, if your ladyship’s at leisure, will leave her carriage. Lady Sneerwell. Beg her to walk in. (Exit servant.) Now Maria, however here is a character to your taste; for, though Mrs. Candour is a little talkative, everybody allows her to be the best-natured and best sort of woman. Maria. Yes, with a very gross affectation of good nature and benevolence, she does more mischief than the direct malice of old Crabtree. Joseph Surface. I’faith ’tis very true, Lady Sneerwell; whenever I hear the current running against the characters of my friends, I never think them in such danger as when Candour undertakes their defence. Lady Sneerwell. Hush!—here she is! Enter mrs. candour. Mrs. Candour. My dear Lady Sneerwell, how have you been this century?—Mr. Surface, what news do you hear?—though indeed it is no matter, for I think one hears nothing else but scandal. Joseph Surface. Just so, indeed, madam. Mrs. Candour. Ah, Maria! child—what, is the whole affair off between you and Charles? His extravagance, I presume—the town talks of nothing else. Maria. I am very sorry, ma’am, the town has so little to do. Mrs. Candour. True, true, child: but there is no stopping people’s tongues. I own I was hurt to hear it, as indeed I was to learn, from the same quarter, that your guardian, Sir Peter, and Lady Teazle have not agreed lately so well as could be wished. Maria. ’Tis strangely impertinent for people to busy themselves so. Mrs. Candour. Very true, child, but what’s to be done? People will talk—there’s no preventing it. Why, it was but yesterday I was told that Miss Gadabout had eloped with Sir Filigree Flirt. But, Lord! there’s no minding what one hears—though, to be sure, I had this from very good authority. Maria. Such reports are highly scandalous. Mrs. Candour. So they are, child—shameful, shameful! But the world is so censorious, no character escapes. Lord, now who would have suspected your friend, Miss Prim, of an indiscretion? Yet such is the ill nature of people, that they say her uncle stopped her last week, just as she was stepping into the York Diligence with her dancing-master. Maria. I’ll answer for’t there are no grounds for the report. Mrs. Candour. Oh, no foundation in the world, I dare swear; no more, probably, than for the story circulated last month, of Mrs. Festino’s affair with Colonel Cassino; though, to be sure, that matter was never rightly cleared up. Joseph Surface. The licence of invention some people take is monstrous indeed. Maria. ’Tis so. But, in my opinion, those who report such things are equally culpable. Mrs. Candour. To be sure they are; talebearers are as bad as the talemakers—’tis an old observation, and a very true one—but what’s to be done, as I said before? how will you prevent people from talking? To-day, Mrs. Clackit assured me Mr. and Mrs. Honeymoon were at last become mere man and wife, like the rest of their acquaintances. She likewise hinted that a certain widow, in the next street, had got rid of her dropsy and recovered her shape in a most surprising manner. And at the same time Miss Tattle, who was by, affirmed that Lord Buffalo had discovered his lady at a house of no extraordinary fame—and that Sir Harry Bouquet and Tom Saunter were to measure swords on a similar provocation. But, Lord, do you think I would report these things! No, no! talebearers, as I said before, are just as bad as tale-makers. Joseph Surface. Ah! Mrs. Candour, if everybody had your forbearance and good nature! Mrs. Candour. I confess, Mr. Surface, I cannot bear to hear people attacked behind their backs, and when ugly circumstances come out against one’s acquaintance I own I always love to think the best. By the by, I hope it is not true that your brother is absolutely ruined? Joseph Surface. I am afraid his circumstances are very bad indeed, ma’am. Mrs. Candour. Ah!—I heard so—but you must tell him to keep up his spirits—everybody almost is in the same way! Lord Spindle, Sir Thomas Splint, Captain Quinze, and Mr. Nickit—all up, I hear, within this week; so, if Charles is undone, he’ll find half his acquaintances ruined too—and that, you know, is a consolation. Joseph Surface. Doubtless, ma’am—a very great one. Enter servant. Servant. Mr. Crabtree and Sir Benjamin Backbite. (Exit servant.) Lady Sneerwell. So, Maria, you see your lover pursues you; positively you shan’t escape. Enter crabtree and sir benjamin backbite. Crabtree. Lady Sneerwell, I kiss your hands. Mrs. Candour, I don’t believe you are acquainted with my nephew, Sir Benjamin Backbite? Egad, ma’am, he has a pretty wit, and is a pretty poet too; isn’t he, Lady Sneerwell? Sir Benjamin. O fie, uncle! Crabtree. Nay, egad it’s true—I’ll back him at a rebus or a charade against the best rhymer in the kingdom. Has your ladyship heard the epigram he wrote last week on Lady Frizzle’s feather catching fire? —Do, Benjamin, repeat it—or the charade you made last night extempore at Mrs. Drowzie’s conversazione. Come now; your first is the name of a fish, your second a great naval commander, and— Sir Benjamin. Uncle, now—prithee— Crabtree. I’faith, ma’am, ’twould surprise you to hear how ready he is at these things. Lady Sneerwell. I wonder, Sir Benjamin, you never publish anything. Sir Benjamin. To say truth, ma’am, ’tis very vulgar to print; and, as my little productions are mostly satires and lampoons on particular people, I find they circulate more by giving copies in confidence to the friends of the parties—however, I have some love elegies, which, when favoured with this lady’s smiles, I mean to give to the public. Crabtree. ’Fore heav’n, ma’am, they’ll immortalize you!—you’ll be handed down to posterity like Petrarch’s Laura, or Waller’s Sacharissa. Sir Benjamin. Yes, madam, I think you will like them, when you shall see them on a beautiful quarto page, where a neat rivulet of text shall murmur through a meadow of margin. ’Fore gad, they will be the most elegant things of their kind! Crabtree. But, ladies, that’s true—have you heard the news? Mrs. Candour. What, sir, do you mean the report of— Crabtree. No, ma’am, that’s not it. Miss Nicely is going to be married to her own footman. Mrs. Candour. Impossible! Crabtree. Ask Sir Benjamin. Sir Benjamin. ’Tis very true, ma’am—everything is fixed, and the wedding liveries bespoke. Crabtree. Yes—and they do say there were pressing reasons for it. Lady Sneerwell. Why, I have heard something of this before. Mrs. Candour. It can’t be—and I wonder anyone should believe such a story of so prudent a lady as Miss Nicely. Sir Benjamin. O lud! ma’am, that’s the very reason ’twas believed at once. She has always been so cautious and so reserved, that everybody was sure there was some reason for it at bottom. Mrs. Candour. Why, to be sure, a tale of scandal is as fatal to the credit of a prudent lady of her stamp as a fever is generally to those of the strongest constitutions; but there is a sort of puny, sickly reputation that is always ailing, yet will outlive the robuster characters of a hundred prudes. Sir Benjamin. True, madam, there are valetudinarians in reputation as well as constitution, who, being conscious of their weak part, avoid the least breath of air, and supply their want of stamina by care and circumspection. Mrs. Candour. Well, but this may be all a mistake. You know, Sir Benjamin, very trifling circumstances often give rise to the most injurious tales. Crabtree. That they do, I’ll be sworn, ma’am. Did you ever hear how Miss Piper came to lose her lover and her character last summer at Tunbridge?—Sir Benjamin, you remember it? Sir Benjamin. Oh, to be sure!—the most whimsical circumstance— Lady Sneerwell. How was it, pray? Crabtree. Why, one evening, at Mrs. Ponto’s assembly, the conversation happened to turn on the difficulty of breeding Nova Scotia sheep in this country. Says a young lady in company, “I have known instances of it; for Miss Letitia Piper, a first cousin of mine, had a Nova Scotia sheep that produced her twins.” “What!” cries the old Dowager Lady Dundizzy (who you know is as deaf as a post), “has Miss Piper had twins?” This mistake, as you may imagine, threw the whole company into a fit of laughing. However, ’twas the next morning everywhere reported, and in a few days believed by the whole town, that Miss Letitia Piper had actually been brought to bed of a fine boy and a girl—and in less than a