continue..
tormented him; it tormented him that they were unwilling to acknowledge what all knew as well as he knew, but preferred to lie to him about his terrible situation, and made him also a party to this lie. This lie, this lie, it clung to him, even to the very evening of his death; this lie, tending to reduce the strange, solemn act of his death to the same level as visits, curtains, sturgeon for dinner—it was horribly painful for Ivan Ilyitch. And strange! many times, when they were playing this farce for his benefit, he was within a hairbreadth of shouting at them: “Stop your foolish lies! you know as well as I know that I am dying, and so at least stop lying.” But he never had the spirit to do this. The strange, terrible act of his dissolution, he saw, was reduced by all who surrounded him to the grade of an accidental unpleasantness, often unseemly—when he was treated as a man who should come into the drawing room and diffuse about him a bad odor—and contrary to those principles of “propriety” which he had served all his life. He saw that no one pitied him, because no one was willing even to appreciate his situation. Only Gerasim appreciated his situation, and pitied him. And, therefore, Ivan Ilyitch was contented only when Gerasim was with him. He was contented when Gerasim for whole nights at a time held his legs, and did not care to go to sleep, saying: “Don’t you trouble yourself, Ivan Ilyitch; I shall get sleep enough.” Or when suddenly, using thou instead of you, he would add: “If thou wert not sick…but since thou art, why not serve thee?” Gerasim alone did not lie: in every way it was evident that he alone comprehended what the trouble was, and thought it unnecessary to hide it, and simply pitied his sick barin, who was wasting away. He even said directly when Ivan Ilyitch wanted to send him off to bed: “We shall all die. Then, why should I not serve you?” he said, meaning by this that he was not troubled by his extra work, for precisely the reason that he was doing it for a dying man, and he hoped that, when his time came, some one would undertake the same service for him. Besides this lie, or in consequence of it, Ivan Ilyitch felt the greatest torment from the fact that no one pitied him as he longed for them to pity him. At some moments after long agonies he yearned more than all—although he would have been the last to confess it—he yearned for some one to pity him as a sick child is pitied. He longed to be caressed, to be kissed, to be wept for, as a child is caressed and comforted. He knew that he was a magistrate of importance, that his beard was turning gray, and that hence it was impossible; but nevertheless he longed for it. And in his relations with Gerasim there was something that approached this. And, therefore, his relations with Gerasim comforted him. Ivan Ilyitch would have liked to weep, would have liked to be caressed, and have tears shed for him; and here came his colleague, the member Shebek, and, instead of weeping and being caressed, Ivan Ilyitch puts on a serious, stern, melancholy expression of countenance, and with all his energy speaks his opinions concerning the significance of a judgment of cassation, and obstinately stands up for it. This lie surrounding him, and existing in him, more than all else poisoned Ivan Ilyitch’s last days. It was morning. It was morning merely because Gerasim had gone, and Piotr, the lackey, had come. He put out the candles, opened one curtain, and began noiselessly to put things to rights. Whether it were morning, whether it were evening, Friday or Sunday, all was a matter of indifference to him, all was one and the same thing. The agonizing, shooting pain, never for an instant appeased; the consciousness of a life hopelessly wasting away, but not yet departed; the same terrible, cursed death coming nearer and nearer, the one reality, and always the same lie—what matter, then, here, of days, weeks, and hours of the day? “Will you not have me bring the tea?” “He must follow form, and that requires masters to take tea in the morning,” he thought; and he said merely: “No.” “Wouldn’t you like to go over to the divan?” “He has to put the room in order, and I hinder him; I am uncleanness, disorder!” he thought to himself, and said merely: “No: leave me!” The lackey still bustled about a little. Ivan Ilyitch put out his hand. Piotr officiously hastened to him: “What do you wish?” “My watch.” Piotr got the watch, which lay nearby, and gave it to him. “Half-past eight. They aren’t up yet?” “No one at all. Vasili Ivanovitch”—that was his son—“has gone to school, and Praskovia Feodorovna gave orders to wake her up if you asked for her. Do you wish it?” “No, it is not necessary.—Shall I not try the tea?” he asked himself. “Yes…tea…bring me some.” Piotr started to go out. Ivan Ilyitch felt terror-stricken at being left alone. “How can I keep him? Yes, my medicine. Piotr, give me my medicine.—Why not? perhaps the medicine may help me yet.” He took the spoon, sipped it. “No, there is no help. All this is nonsense and delusion,” he said, as he immediately felt the familiar, mawkish, hopeless taste. “No, I cannot have any faith in it. But this pain,…why this pain? Would that it might cease for a minute!” And he began to groan. Piotr came back. “Nothing…go! Bring the tea.” Piotr went out. Ivan Ilyitch, left alone, began to groan, not so much from the pain, although it was horrible, as from mental anguish. “Always the same thing, and the same thing; all these endless days and nights. Would it might come very soon! What very soon? Death, blackness? No, no! Anything rather than death!” When Piotr came back with the tea on a tray, Ivan Ilyitch stared long at him in bewilderment, not comprehending who he was, what he was. Piotr was abashed at this gaze; and when Piotr showed his confusion, Ivan Ilyitch came to himself. “Oh, yes,” said he, “the tea; very well, set it down. Only help me to wash, and to put on a clean shirt.” And Ivan Ilyitch began to perform his toilet. With resting spells he washed his hands and face, cleaned his teeth, began to comb his hair, and looked into the mirror. It seemed frightful, perfectly frightful, to him, to see how his hair lay flat upon his pale brow. While he was changing his shirt, he knew that it would be still more frightful if he gazed at his body; and so he did not look at himself. But now it was done. He put on his khalat, wrapped himself in his plaid, and sat down in his easy chair to take his tea. For a single moment he felt refreshed; but as soon as he began to drink the tea, again that same taste, that same pain. He compelled himself to drink it all, and lay down, stretching out his legs. He lay down, and let Piotr go. Always the same thing. Now a drop of hope gleaming, then a sea of despair rising up, and always pain, always melancholy, and always the same monotony. It was terribly melancholy to the lonely man; he longed to call in someone, but he knew in advance that it is still worse when others are present. “Even morphine again…to get a little sleep!…I will tell him, tell the doctor, to find something else. It is impossible, impossible so.” One hour, two hours, would pass in this way. But there! the bell in the corridor. Perhaps it is the doctor. Exactly: it is the doctor, fresh, hearty, portly, jovial, with an expression as if he said, “You may feel apprehension of something or other, but we will immediately straighten things out for you.” The doctor knows that this expression is not appropriate here; but he has already put it on once for all, and he cannot rid himself of it—like a man who has put on his dress coat in the morning, and gone to make calls. The doctor rubs his hands with an air of hearty assurance. “I am cold. A healthy frost. Let me get warm a little,” says he, with just the expression that signifies that all he needs is to wait until he gets warmed a little, and, when he is warmed, then he will straighten things out. “Well, now, how goes it?” Ivan Ilyitch feels that the doctor wants to say, “How go your little affairs?” but that he feels that it is impossible to say so; and he says, “What sort of a night did you have?” Ivan