Work: The Misanthrope Field: misanthrope Author: Molière Title: ACT V Title: SCENE I Alcestes. My resolution is fixed, I tell you. Philintes. But, whatever this stroke may be, must it needs oblige you— Alcestes. No, you labour in vain, in vain do you reason with me, nothing can divert me from what I say. Too much perverseness reigns in the age we live in, and I’m resolved to withdraw myself from all human commerce. What! the world sees that honour, probity, modesty, and the laws are all at once against my adversary! People are everywhere crying up the justice of my cause! My mind reposes itself upon the assurance of my right! At the same time I am deceived in the success; I have justice on my side, yet I lose my cause! A scoundrel, whose scandalous history is so well known, comes off triumphant by a most hellish falsehood! All honesty yields to his perfidy! He finds a way of justifying himself in cutting my throat! The importance of his grimace, wherein is glaring artifice, overthrows all right and perverts justice! He gets a decree of court to crown his villainy; and still not content with the injury they do me, there is got abroad in the world an abominable book, of which even the reading is criminal, a book that deserves the utmost severity, of which the knave has the impudence to make me the author! And upon this Orontes is observed to mutter, and villainously endeavours to support the imposture! He who maintains the rank of an honest man at court, to whom I have nothing but been sincere and frank; who comes to me in spite of me, with an eager forwardness, to demand my opinion of some verses he has made, and because I treat him with honour, and would neither betray him, nor the truth, he is aiding to oppress me with an imaginary crime! Now is he become my greatest adversary! And I am never heartily to be pardoned, because I did not think his song was a good one! S’death, ’tis after this manner mankind are made! These are the actions to which a sense of glory carries ’em! This is the fidelity, the virtuous zeal, the justice and the honour one finds among ’em. Let’s away, ’tis too much to bear the plagues they are devising; let us escape from these savage woods, this cutthroat place; and since among men you live like real wolves, traitors, you shall never have me with you again as long as I live. Philintes. I apprehend the design you are in to be a good deal too hasty, and the whole mischief is not so great as you make it. What your antagonist has the assurance to impute to you has not had the credit to occasion your being arrested; his false report we see destroys itself, and ’tis an action which may possibly turn severely upon himself. Alcestes. Him! He fears not any clamour from such tricks as these, he has a licence to be an avowed villain; and so far will such an adventure as this be from hurting his credit, you’ll see him to-morrow in a more flourishing condition. Philintes. In short, ’tis certain people have not given in too much to the report his malice has spread against you; from this quarter hitherto you have nothing to fear; and as for your lawsuit, which you may complain about, ’tis easy for you to bring the trial on afresh, and against this sentence— Alcestes. No, I’ll abide by it. However sensible an injury such a sentence may do me, I’ll take great care they shall not reverse it; one sees too plainly by this how right is abused; and I would have it remain to posterity as a notorious mark, a famous testimony of the wickedness of the men of this age. It may indeed cost me about twenty thousand livres, but for twenty thousand livres I shall have a right to rave against the iniquity of human nature, and to nourish an immortal hatred for it. Philintes. But in short— Alcestes. But in short your pains are superfluous. What can you say to me, sir, upon this head? Can you possibly have the assurance to excuse to my face the horribleness of all that’s transacting? Philintes. No, I do agree to what you please. Everything goes by cabal, and by pure interest; and ’tis nowadays scarce anything else but craft that carries it, and men should be otherways disposed. But is their want of justice a reason why we should think of withdrawing from their society? All these human defects give us opportunities in life of exercising our philosophy. ’Tis the most amiable employment virtue finds; and if every place were full of honesty, and all hearts were frank, just, and docile, the greatest part of our virtues would be useless to us, since the use of ’em is placed in this, in the power of bearing the injustice of another, in respect to our property, without being ruffled. And after the same way that a heart of profound virtue— Alcestes. I know, sir, that you talk the best in the world. You always abound in fine reasoning, but you lose your time and all your fine discourses. Reason persuades me for my good to retire; I have not command enough of my tongue, I could not answer for what I might say, and I should run myself into a thousand broils. Let me, without any more words, wait upon Célimène, ’tis proper I have her consent to my design; I shall now see whether she really loves me, and this is the critical moment to convince me of it. Philintes. Let us go up to Éliante, and wait her coming. Alcestes. No, my mind is agitated with too much care; go you and see her, and leave me, in short, in this little dusky corner with my gloomy melancholy. Philintes. That’s odd sort o’ company to wait for, I’ll go prevail upon Éliante to come down. Title: SCENE II Orontes. Yes, madam, you are to consider whether by so dear an engagement you will fix me forever yours. I must have an absolute certainty of your affections; a lover does not like wavering in such a point as this. If the warmth of my passion has really moved you, you should not by any means scruple letting me see it; and after all, the proof I demand of you is no more than not to admit of Alcestes’ addresses, to sacrifice him, madam, to my love, and in short, from this time forward to banish him your house. Célimène. But what mighty matter provokes you against him. You whom I have heard speak so much of his merit? Orontes. There’s no need, madam, of these explanations. The matter in hand is to know your sentiments: pray, choose to keep one or t’other, my resolution only waits upon yours. Alcestes (stepping out of the corner whither he had retired). Yes, the gentleman is right: you must choose, madam, and his demand here agrees with my desire; the same impatience urges me, and the same care calls me, my love must have an infallible mark of yours. Matters can be protracted no longer, this is the moment you are to explain yourself. Orontes. I would not by any means, sir, disturb your good fortune by an importunate passion. Alcestes. Jealous, or not jealous, sir, I’ll have no share of her heart with you. Orontes. If she thinks your love preferable to mine— Alcestes. If she is capable of the least inclination for you— Orontes. I swear henceforward to make no pretensions to her. Alcestes. I peremptorily swear never to set eyes on her more. Orontes. Madam, you may speak without constraint. Alcestes. Madam, you may explain yourself without fear. Orontes. You have nothing to do but tell us where your inclinations are fixed. Alcestes. You have nothing but to cut the matter short, and choose which of us you will. Orontes. What? do you seem to have any difficulty in such a choice? Alcestes. What? do you hesitate, and appear uncertain? Célimène. Good heavens! how unseasonable is this importunity! and how you show yourselves both in the wrong! I can easily determine as to the preference, and ’tis not my heart here that wavers: ’tis not in suspense betwixt you, nor is anything sooner done than to choose what we wish. But to say the truth, I am not a little upon the rack to make a declaration of this kind before you. I think these disobliging speeches should never be spoken in the presence of people. That a heart gives light sufficient in its inclinations, without our being obliged to proceed abruptly to a quarrel; and that ’tis sufficient, in short, that proofs of a milder nature inform a lover of the ill success of his courtship. Orontes. No, no, I