continue..
returns. Joseph Surface. Nay, but, Maria, do not leave me with a frown—by all that’s honest, I swear—Gad’s life, here’s Lady Teazle—(Aside.) You must not—no, you shall not—for, though I have the greatest regard for Lady Teazle— Maria. Lady Teazle! Joseph Surface. Yet were Sir Peter to suspect— Lady Teazle (coming forward). What’s this, pray? Do you take her for me?—Child, you are wanted in the next room.—(Exit maria.) What is all this, pray? Joseph Surface. Oh, the most unlucky circumstance in nature! Maria has somehow suspected the tender concern I have for your happiness, and threatened to acquaint Sir Peter with her suspicions, and I was just endeavouring to reason with her when you came. Lady Teazle. Indeed! but you seemed to adopt a very tender mode of reasoning—do you usually argue on your knees? Joseph Surface. Oh, she’s a child—and I thought a little bombast—but, Lady Teazle, when are you to give me your judgment on my library, as you promised? Lady Teazle. No, no, I begin to think it would be imprudent, and you know I admit you as a lover no further than fashion requires. Joseph Surface. True—a mere Platonic cicisbeo, what every London wife is entitled to. Lady Teazle. Certainly, one must not be out of the fashion; however, I have so many of my country prejudices left, that, though Sir Peter’s ill humour may vex me ever so, it never shall provoke me to— Joseph Surface. The only revenge in your power. Well, I applaud your moderation. Lady Teazle. Go—you are an insinuating wretch! But we shall be missed—let us join the company. Joseph Surface. But we had best not return together. Lady Teazle. Well, don’t stay—for Maria shan’t come to hear any more of your reasoning, I promise you. (Exit lady teazle.) Joseph Surface. A curious dilemma, truly, my politics have run me into! I wanted, at first, only to ingratiate myself with Lady Teazle, that she might not be my enemy with Maria; and I have, I don’t know how, become her serious lover. Sincerely I begin to wish I had never made such a point of gaining so very good a character, for it has led me into so many cursed rogueries that I doubt I shall be exposed at last. (Exit.) Title: SCENE III—SIR PETER’S Enter sir oliver surface and rowley Sir Oliver. Ha! ha! ha! and so my old friend is married, hey?—a young wife out of the country. Ha! ha! ha!—that he should have stood bluff to old bachelor so long, and sink into a husband at last! Rowley. But you must not rally him on the subject, Sir Oliver; ’tis a tender point, I assure you, though he has been married only seven months. Sir Oliver. Then he has been just half a year on the stool of repentance! Poor Peter! But you say he has entirely given up Charles—never sees him, hey? Rowley. His prejudice against him is astonishing, and I am sure greatly increased by a jealousy of him with Lady Teazle, which he has been industriously led into by a scandalous society in the neighbourhood, who have contributed not a little to Charles’s ill name; whereas the truth is, I believe, if the lady is partial to either of them, his brother is the favorite. Sir Oliver. Aye, I know there are a set of malicious, prating, prudent gossips, both male and female, who murder characters to kill time, and will rob a young fellow of his good name before he has years to know the value of it—but I am not to be prejudiced against my nephew by such, I promise you! No, no; if Charles has done nothing false or mean, I shall compound for his extravagance. Rowley. Then, my life on’t, you will reclaim him. Ah, sir, it gives me new life to find that your heart is not turned against him, and that the son of my good old master has one friend, however, left. Sir Oliver. What! shall I forget, Master Rowley, when I was at his years myself? Egad, my brother and I were neither of us very prudent youths—and yet, I believe, you have not seen many better men than your old master was? Rowley. Sir, ’tis this reflection gives me assurance that Charles may yet be a credit to his family. But here comes Sir Peter. Sir Oliver. Egad, so he does! Mercy on me, he’s greatly altered, and seems to have a settled married look! One may read husband in his face at this distance! Enter sir peter teazle. Sir Peter. Hah! Sir Oliver—my old friend! Welcome to England a thousand times! Sir Oliver. Thank you, thank you, Sir Peter! and i’faith I am glad to find you well, believe me! Sir Peter. Ah! ’tis a long time since we met—sixteen years, I doubt, Sir Oliver, and many a cross accident in the time. Sir Oliver. Aye, I have had my share—but, what! I find you are married, hey, my old boy? Well, well, it can’t be helped—and so I wish you joy with all my heart! Sir Peter. Thank you, thank you, Sir Oliver. Yes, I have entered into the happy state—but we’ll not talk of that now. Sir Oliver. True, true, Sir Peter; old friends should not begin on grievances at first meeting. No, no, no. Rowley (to sir oliver). Take care, pray, sir. Sir Oliver. Well, so one of my nephews is a wild rogue, hey? Sir Peter. Wild! Ah! my old friend, I grieve for your disappointment there—he’s a lost young man, indeed; however, his brother will make you amends; Joseph is, indeed, what a youth should be—everybody in the world speaks well of him. Sir Oliver. I am sorry to hear it—he has too good a character to be an honest fellow. Everybody speaks well of him! Psha! then he has bowed as low to knaves and fools as to the honest dignity of genius or virtue. Sir Peter. What, Sir Oliver! do you blame him for not making enemies? Sir Oliver. Yes, if he has merit enough to deserve them. Sir Peter. Well, well—you’ll be convinced when you know him. ’Tis edification to hear him converse—he professes the noblest sentiments. Sir Oliver. Ah, plague of his sentiments! If he salutes me with a scrap of morality in his mouth, I shall be sick directly. But, however, don’t mistake me, Sir Peter; I don’t mean to defend Charles’s errors—but, before I form my judgment of either of them, I intend to make a trial of their hearts—and my friend Rowley and I have planned something for the purpose. Rowley. And Sir Peter shall own for once he has been mistaken. Sir Peter. Oh, my life on Joseph’s honour! Sir Oliver. Well, come, give us a bottle of good wine, and we’ll drink the lad’s health, and tell you our scheme. Sir Peter. Allons, then! Sir Oliver. And don’t, Sir Peter, be so severe against your old friend’s son. Odds my life! I am not sorry that he has run out of the course a little; for my part, I hate to see prudence clinging to the green succours of youth; ’tis like ivy round a sapling, and spoils the growth of the tree. (Exeunt.)