Work: Characters Field: characters Author: La Bruyère Title: DÉMOPHILE Démophile, at my right, laments and exclaims: “All is lost, the country is done for, at least it is on the road to destruction. How can so strong, so general a coalition be resisted? What means are there, I do not say to overcome, but even to resist so many powerful enemies? There is no precedent for it in the monarchy. A hero, an Achilles, would succumb to it. Grievous faults have been committed (he goes on), I know what I am saying, it is my occupation, I have seen war and history has taught me a great deal.” Then he speaks with admiration of Olivier Le Daim and Jacques Coeur: “There were men!” says he, “There were ministers!” He relates the worst and most unlucky news which could be invented; sometimes a party of our troops have been lured into an ambush and cut to pieces; sometimes certain troops besieged in a castle have surrendered unconditionally and have all been slaughtered: if you say the rumour is false and has not been confirmed, he does not listen, he adds that such a general has been killed; and although it is true that the general has only been slightly wounded and you assure him of the fact, he deplores his death, pities his widow, his children, the state; he pities himself: “He has lost a good friend and a powerful protector.” He says that the German cavalry is invincible and grows pale at the very name of the Emperor’s cuirassiers. “If such a place is attacked,” he continues, “the siege will be raised. Either we shall remain on the defensive without risking battle; or, if we fight, we shall lose, and if we lose it, there is the enemy at the frontier.” And as Démophile gives the enemy wings, here he is in the heart of the kingdom: already he hears the tocsin sounding from the belfries and the call to arms; he thinks of his property and his estates; where will he place his money, his furniture, his family? Where will he fly to? Switzerland or Venice? The foregoing consists of a selection of sketches from La Bruyère’s characters .