Work: The Misanthrope Field: misanthrope Author: Molière Title: ACT III Title: SCENE I Clitander. Dear marquis, I see thou art absolutely at ease, everything makes thee gay, and nothing discomposes thee. Dost thou think i’ good faith, if thou hast not lost thy eyesight, that thou hast any mighty reason to appear so joyful? Acastes. Egad, I don’t see when I examine myself where I can pick out any reason to be melancholy. I have a fortune, I’m young and spring from a family which, with some reason, may style itself noble; and I think, by the rank my extraction gives me, that there are very few employments which I don’t stand fair for; as to courage, which we ought to value above everything, the world knows without vanity that I don’t lack it; and the world has seen me push an affair in life after a vigorous and gallant manner enough. For wit, doubtless I have it, with a good taste too, to judge and reason upon everything without study; to make a learned figure in the playhouse when anything new comes out which I am fond of to idolatry, to decide there in chief, and set the whole house in an uproar at all the fine passages that deserve a clap. I’m adroit enough, I’ve a good air, a good mien, above all a handsome set of teeth, and a very fine shape. As to dressing well, I think, without flattering myself, he would be very unlucky who should dispute it with me. I am in great esteem, as great as a man can be, beloved by the fair sex, and well with my prince. I do think that with all this, my dear marquis, I do verily think a man might rest mighty well satisfied with himself in any country of the world. Clitander. Yes, but finding conquests so easy elsewhere, why do you sigh here to no purpose? Acastes. I? ’fore gad I’m not of the make nor humour to endure the indifference of a fine lady. ’Tis enough for awkward people, for vulgar merit, to burn with constancy for your severe beauties; to languish at their feet, and be passive under their cruelty; to seek relief from sighs and tears, and endeavour by dancing a careful long attendance to obtain what is denied to their merit. But people of my air, marquis, are not made to love upon credit, and be at the whole expense. How extraordinary soever the merit of the fair may be, I’m of opinion, thank Heaven, that we have our value as well as they, and that ’tis not reason sufficient to be honoured with a heart like mine that it costs ’em nothing; and, at least to place everything in its just balance, ’tis fitting advances ought to be made at a common expense. Clitander. ’Tis therefore thy opinion, marquis, that thou art very well here! Acastes. I have some room, marquis, to think so. Clitander. Believe me, and ha’ done with that extreme mistake; you flatter yourself, my dear, and put out your own eyes. Acastes. ’Tis true, I flatter myself, really I do put out my own eyes. Clitander. But who makes you judge yourself so perfectly happy? Acastes. I flatter myself. Clitander. What d’ye found your conjectures upon? Acastes. I do put out my own eyes. Clitander. Have you pretty sure proof of it? Acastes. I impose upon myself, I tell you. Clitander. May Célimène have made any secret acknowledgment of her passion? Acastes. No, I am cruelly used. Clitander. Prithee, answer me. Acastes. I meet with nothing but rebuffs. Clitander. Ha’ done with this raillery, and tell me what hopes she may have given you. Acastes. I am the wretch, and thou the fortunate man; she has an utter aversion to my person, and I must hang myself some o’ these days. Clitander. Come on then, are you willing, marquis, that, to adjust our love affairs, we should both unanimously determine upon one thing? That he who can show a certain mark of having the greater share in Célimène’s heart, the other shall here give place to the pretended conqueror, and set him free from a continual rival? Acastes. Egad, this is a language exactly to my taste, and I do from the bottom of my heart agree to it. But hush. Title: SCENE II Célimène. Here still? Clitander. Love, madam, detains us. Célimène. I just now heard a coach enter below, do you know who it is? Clitander. No. Title: SCENE III Basque. Arsinoé, madam, is coming up to see you. Célimène. What would the woman have with me? Basque. Éliante is there below to entertain her. Célimène. What’s in her head? And who sends for her? Acastes. She passes in all places for a consummated prude; and the ardour of her zeal— Célimène. Yes, yes, mere grimace. In her soul she’s one of this world, and all her cares are bent to hook in somebody, without being able to compass it. She can’t look but with an envious eye upon the professed humble servants who are followers of any other lady; and, her forlorn merit being abandoned by everybody, is perpetually a-raving against the blindness of the age. She endeavours under the sham veil of prudery to conceal that hideous solitude which one sees in her house; and to save the credit of her feeble charms she would fix a crime upon everything out of their power. At the same time, a spark would highly please the dame; and she has a sneaking kindness even for Alcestes. The court he pays me is an insult upon her charms; she will have it a kind of robbery that I commit upon her. And her jealous spite, which she hides with great difficulty, gives underhand a fling against me in all places where she comes. In short, I never saw anything, to my fancy, so stupid; she is to a supreme degree impertinent, and— Title: SCENE IV Célimène. Hah! What propitious fortune has brought you hither, madam? Sincerely I was in pain about you. Arsinoé. I come to give you some intelligence which I thought I owed you. Célimène. Oh! my stars! how glad am I to see you! Exeunt Clitander and Acastes laughing. Title: SCENE V Arsinoé. They could not have gone away more apropos. Célimène. Shall we sit down? Arsinoé. ’Tis not at all necessary. Friendship, madam, ought, above all, to display itself in those things which may be of most importance to us. And as nothing can be of greater importance than honour and decorum, I come to testify the friendship I have for you by a piece of intelligence which touches your honour. Yesterday I was a-visiting some people of singular virtue, where they turned the subject of the discourse upon you: and there your conduct, madam, with all its mighty show, had the misfortune not to be commended. That crowd o’ people whose visits you admit of, your gallantry, and the rumours it excites found censurers more than it should have done, and more rigorous than I could have wished. You may well think what side I took. I did everything in my power to defend you; I strongly excused you, on the foot of your intention, and would be bound for the honesty of your mind. But you know there are certain things in life which one cannot excuse, however desirous one may be to do it. And I was obliged to grant that the air with which you live did you some injury. That it had but an ill face in the eyes of the world, that there are no stories so ill-natured but are everywhere raised about it, and that, if you pleased, your whole deportment might give less handle to uncharitable judges. Not that I believe at the bottom your virtue touched; Heaven preserve me from entertaining such a thought! But folks easily give credit to the shadow of a crime, and ’tis not enough for us to live well, as to ourselves. I believe you, madam, to be of too considerate a spirit not to take in good part this profitable advice, and to attribute it to the secret motions of a zeal which gives me a thorough attachment to all your interests. Célimène. Madam, I have a great many thanks to return you. Such intelligence obliges me: and so far from taking it ill, I design this instant to acknowledge the favour by a piece of intelligence which touches your honour too; and as I see you discover yourself my friend by informing me of the reports that people spread about me, I shall in my turn follow so kind an example by acquainting you what ’tis people say of you. In a certain place, where I was a-visiting t’other day, I met with some people of most extraordinary merit, who, speaking of the true pains a person takes who lives virtuously, turned the conversation,