Work: The School for Scandal Field: school for scandal Author: Richard Sheridan Title: ACT II Title: SCENE I—SIR PETER TEAZLE’shouse Enter sir peter and lady teazle. Sir Peter. Lady Teazle, Lady Teazle, I’ll not bear it! Lady Teazle. Sir Peter, Sir Peter, you may bear it or not, as you please; but I ought to have my own way in everything, and what’s more, I will too. What! though I was educated in the country, I know very well that women of fashion in London are accountable to nobody after they are married. Sir Peter. Very well, ma’am, very well—so a husband is to have no influence, no authority? Lady Teazle. Authority! No, to be sure—if you wanted authority over me, you should have adopted me, and not married me; I am sure you were old enough. Sir Peter. Old enough!—aye, there it is! Well, well, Lady Teazle, though my life may be made unhappy by your temper, I’ll not be ruined by your extravagance. Lady Teazle. My extravagance! I’m sure I’m not more extravagant than a woman of fashion ought to be. Sir Peter. No, no, madam, you shall throw away no more sums on such unmeaning luxury. ’Slife! to spend as much to furnish your dressing-room with flowers in winter as would suffice to turn the Pantheon into a greenhouse, and give a fête-champêtre at Christmas! Lady Teazle. Lord, Sir Peter, am I to blame because flowers are dear in cold weather? You should find fault with the climate, and not with me. For my part, I am sure I wish it was spring all the year round, and that roses grew under one’s feet! Sir Peter. Oons! madam—if you had been born to this, I shouldn’t wonder at your talking thus. But you forget what your situation was when I married you. Lady Teazle. No, no, I don’t; ’twas a very disagreeable one, or I should never have married you. Sir Peter. Yes, yes, madam, you were then in somewhat a humbler style—the daughter of a plain country squire. Recollect, Lady Teazle, when I saw you first, sitting at your tambour, in a pretty figured linen gown, with a bunch of keys by your side, your hair combed smooth over a roll, and your apartment hung round with fruits in worsted, of your own working. Lady Teazle. O, yes! I remember it very well, and a curious life I led—my daily occupation to inspect the dairy, superintend the poultry, make extracts from the family receipt-book, and comb my aunt Deborah’s lap-dog. Sir Peter. Yes, yes, ma’am, ’twas so indeed. Lady Teazle. And then, you know, my evening amusements! To draw patterns for ruffles, which I had not the materials to make; to play Pope Joan with the curate; to read a novel to my aunt; or to be stuck down to an old spinet to strum my father to sleep after a foxchase. Sir Peter. I am glad you have so good a memory. Yes, madam, these were the recreations I took you from; but now you must have your coach— vis-à-vis—and three powdered footmen before your chair and, in summer, a pair of white cats to draw you to Kensington Gardens. No recollection, I suppose, when you were content to ride double, behind the butler, on a docked coach-horse? Lady Teazle. No—I swear I never did that—I deny the butler and the coach-horse. Sir Peter. This, madam, was your situation—and what have I not done for you? I have made you a woman of fashion, of fortune, of rank—in short, I have made you my wife. Lady Teazle. Well, then, and there is but one thing more you can make me to add to the obligation—and that is— Sir Peter. My widow, I suppose? Lady Teazle. Hem! hem! Sir Peter. Thank you, madam—but don’t flatter yourself; for though your ill conduct may disturb my peace, it shall never break my heart, I promise you: however, I am equally obliged to you for the hint. Lady Teazle. Then why will you endeavour to make yourself so disagreeable to me, and thwart me in every little elegant expense? Sir Peter. ’Slife, madam, I say, had you any of these elegant expenses when you married me? Lady Teazle. Lud, Sir Peter! would you have me be out of the fashion? Sir Peter. The fashion, indeed! what had you to do with the fashion before you married me? Lady Teazle. For my part, I should think you would like to have your wife thought a woman of taste. Sir Peter. Aye—there again—taste! Zounds! madam, you had no taste when you married me! Lady Teazle. That’s very true, indeed, Sir Peter! and, after having married you, I am sure I should never pretend to taste again! But now, Sir Peter, if we have finished our daily jangle, I presume I may go to my engagement of [at] Lady Sneerwell’s? Sir Peter. Aye—there’s another precious circumstance!—a charming set of acquaintances you have made there! Lady Teazle. Nay, Sir Peter, they are people of rank and fortune, and remarkably tenacious of reputation. Sir Peter. Yes, egad, they are tenacious of reputation with a vengeance; for they don’t choose anybody should have a character but themselves! Such a crew! Ah! many a wretch has rid on a hurdle who has done less mischief than those utterers of forged tales, coiners of scandal—and clippers of reputation. Lady Teazle. What! would you restrain the freedom of speech? Sir Peter. Oh! they have made you just as bad as any one of the society. Lady Teazle. Why, I believe I do bear a part with a tolerable grace. But I vow I have no malice against the people I abuse; when I say an ill-natured thing, ’tis out of pure good humour—and I take it for granted they deal exactly in the same manner with me. But, Sir Peter, you know you promised to come to Lady Sneerwell’s too. Sir Peter. Well, well, I’ll call in just to look after my own character. Lady Teazle. Then, indeed, you must make haste after me or you’ll be too late. So good-bye to ye. (Exit lady teazle.) Sir Peter. So—I have gained much by my intended expostulations! Yet with what a charming air she contradicts everything I say, and how pleasingly she shows her contempt of my authority! Well, though I can’t make her love me, there is a great satisfaction in quarrelling with her; and I think she never appears to such advantage as when she’s doing everything in her power to plague me. (Exit.) Title: SCENE II—LADY SNEERWELL’S Lady Sneerwell. Nay, positively, we will hear it. Joseph Surface. Yes, yes, the epigram, by all means. Sir Benjamin. Plague on’t, uncle! ’tis mere nonsense. Crabtree. No, no; ’fore gad, very clever for an extempore! Sir Benjamin. But, ladies, you should be acquainted with the circumstance—you must know, that one day last week, as Lady Betty Curricle was taking the dust in Hyde Park, in a sort of duodecimo phaeton, she desired me to write some verses on her ponies; upon which, I took out my pocket-book, and in one moment produced the following: Poem ```Sure never were seen two such beautiful ponies! Other horses are clowns, and these macaronies! Nay, to give ’em this title I’m sure isn’t wrong— Their legs are so slim, and their tails are so long.``` Crabtree. There, ladies—done in the smack of a whip, and on horseback too! Joseph Surface. A very Phoebus, mounted—indeed, Sir Benjamin. Sir Benjamin. O dear sir—trifles—trifles. Enter lady teazle and maria. Mrs. Candour. I must have a copy. Lady Sneerwell. Lady Teazle, I hope we shall see Sir Peter. Lady Teazle. I believe he’ll wait on your ladyship presently. Lady Sneerwell. Maria, my love, you look grave. Come, you shall sit down to cards with Mr. Surface. Maria. I take very little pleasure in cards—however, I’ll do as your ladyship pleases. Lady Teazle (aside). I am surprised Mr. Surface should sit down with her. I thought he would have embraced this opportunity of speaking to me before Sir Peter came. Mrs. Candour. Now, I’ll die but you are so scandalous, I’ll forswear your society. Lady Teazle. What’s the matter, Mrs. Candour? Mrs. Candour. They’ll not allow our friend Miss Vermilion to be handsome. Lady Sneerwell. Oh, surely, she’s a pretty woman. Crabtree. I am very glad you think so, ma’am. Mrs. Candour. She has a charming fresh colour. Lady Teazle. Yes, when it is fresh put on. Mrs. Candour. O fie! I’ll swear her colour is natural—I have seen it come and go. Lady Teazle. I dare swear you have, ma’am—it goes of a night, and comes again in the morning. Mrs. Candour. Ha! ha! ha! how I hate to hear you talk so! But surely, now, her sister is, or was, very handsome. Crabtree. Who? Mrs. Evergreen?—O Lord! she’s six-and-fifty if she’s an hour! Mrs. Candour. Now positively you wrong her; fifty-two or fifty-three is the utmost—and