continue..
the tortoise, must first reach the place where it started:—but the tortoise has already departed. This comedy, however, is repeated indefinitely. As Achilles arrives at each new point in the race, the tortoise having been there, has already left. Achilles is as unlikely to catch him as a rider on a carrousel the rider ahead. Finally: the arrow in flight must be moving every instant of time. But at every instant it must be somewhere in space. However, if the arrow must always be in some one place, it cannot at every instant also be in transit, for to be in transit is to be nowhere. Aristotle and lesser saints in almost every age tried to demolish these paradoxes, but not very creditably. Three German professors succeeded where the saints had failed. At the end of the nineteenth century, it seemed that Bolzano, Weierstrass and Cantor had laid the infinite to rest, and Zeno’s paradoxes as well. The modern method of disposing of the paradoxes is not to dismiss them as mere sophisms unworthy of serious attention. The history of mathematics, in fact, recounts a poetic vindication of Zeno’s stand. Zeno was, at one time, as Bertrand Russell has said, “A notable victim of posterity’s lack of judgment.” That wrong has been righted. In disposing of the infinitely small, Weierstrass showed that the moving arrow is really always at rest, and that we live in Zeno’s changeless world. The work of Georg Cantor, which we shall soon encounter, showed that if we are to believe that Achilles can catch the tortoise, we shall have to be prepared to swallow a bigger paradox than any Zeno ever conceived of: the whole is no greater than many of its parts! The infinitely small had been a nuisance for more than two thousand years. At best, the innumerable opinions it evoked deserved the laconic verdict of Scotch juries: “Not proven.” Until Weierstrass appeared, the total advance was a confirmation of Zeno’s argument against motion. Even the jokes were better. Leibniz, according to Carlyle, made the mistake of trying to explain the infinitesimal to a Queen—Sophie Charlotte of Prussia. She informed him that the behavior of her courtiers made her so familiar with the infinitely small, that she needed no mathematical tutor to explain it. But philosophers and mathematicians, according to Russell, “having less acquaintance with the courts, continued to discuss this topic, though without making any advance.” Berkeley, with the subtlety and humor necessary for an Irish bishop, made some pointed attacks on the infinitesimal, during the adolescent period of the calculus, that had the very best, sharp-witted, scholastic sting. One could perhaps speak, if only with poetic fervor, of the infinitely large, but what, pray, was the infinitely small? The Greeks, with less than their customary sagacity, introduced it in regarding a circle as differing infinitesimally from a polygon with a large number of equal sides. Leibniz used it as the bricks for the infinitesimal calculus. Still, no one knew what it was. The infinitesimal had wondrous properties. It was not zero, yet smaller than any quantity. It could be assigned no quantity or size, yet a sizable number of infinitesimals made a very definite quantity. Unable to discover its nature, happily able to dispense with it, Weierstrass interred it alongside of the phlogiston and other once-cherished errors. The infinitely large offered more stubborn resistance. Whatever it is, it is a doughty weed. The subject of reams of nonsense, sacred and profane, it was first discussed fully, logically, and without benefit of clergy-like prejudices by Bernhard Bolzano. Die Paradoxien des Unendlichen, a remarkable little volume, appeared posthumously in 1851. Like the work of another Austrian priest, Gregor Mendel, whose distinguished treatise on the principles of heredity escaped oblivion only by chance, this important book, charmingly written, made no great impression on Bolzano’s contemporaries. It is the creation of a clear, forceful, penetrating intelligence. For the first time in twenty centuries the infinite was treated as a problem in science, and not as a problem in theology. Both Cantor and Dedekind are indebted to Bolzano for the foundations of the mathematical treatment of the infinite. Among the many paradoxes he gathered and explained, one, dating from Galileo, illustrates a typical source of confusion: Construct a square—ABCD. About the point A as center, with one side as radius, describe a quarter-circle, intersecting the square at B and D. Draw PR parallel to AD, cutting AB at P, CD at R, the diagonal AC at N, and the quarter-circle at M. By a well-known geometrical theorem, it can be shown that if PN, PM and PR are radii, the following relationship exists: Permit PR to approach AD. Then the circle with PN as radius becomes smaller, and the ring between the circles with PM and PR as radii becomes correspondingly smaller. Finally, when PR becomes identical with AD, the radius PN vanishes, leaving the point A, while the ring between the two circles PM and PR contracts into one periphery with AD as radius. From equation (1) it may be concluded that the point A takes up as much area as the circumference of the circle with AD as radius. Bolzano realized that there is only an appearance of a paradox. The two classes of points, one composed of a single member, the point A, the other of the points in the circumference of the circle with AB as radius, take up exactly the same amount of area. The area of both is zero! The paradox springs from the erroneous conception that the number of points in a given configuration is an indication of the area which it occupies. Points, finite or infinite in number, have no dimensions and can therefore occupy no area. Through the centuries such paradoxes had piled up. Born of the union of vague ideas and vague philosophical reflections, they were nurtured on sloppy thinking. Bolzano cleared away most of the muddle, preparing the way for Cantor. It is to Cantor that the mathematics of the infinitely large owes its coming of age. Georg Cantor was born in St. Petersburg in 1845, six years before Bolzano’s book appeared. Though born in Russia, he lived the greater part of his life in Germany, where he taught at the University of Halle. While Weierstrass was busy disposing of the infinitesimal, Cantor set himself the apparently more formidable task at the other pole. The infinitely small might be laughed out of existence, but who dared laugh at the infinitely large? Certainly not Cantor! Theological curiosity prompted his task, but the mathematical interest came to subsume every other. In dealing with the science of the infinite, Cantor realized that the first requisite was to define terms. His definition of “infinite class” which we shall paraphrase, rests upon a paradox. an infinite class has the unique property that the whole is no greater than some of its parts. That statement is as essential for the mathematics of the infinite as the whole is greater than any of its parts is for finite arithmetic. When we recall that two classes are equal if their elements can be put into one-to-one correspondence, the latter statement becomes obvious. Zeno would not have challenged it, in spite of his scepticism about the obvious. But what is obvious for the finite is false for the infinite; our extensive experience with finite classes is misleading. Since, for example, the class of men and the class of mathematicians are both finite, anyone realizing that some men are not mathematicians would correctly conclude that the class of men is the larger of the two. He might also conclude that the number of integers, even and odd, is greater than the number of even integers. But we see from the following pairing that he would be mistaken: Under every integer, odd or even, we may write its double—an even integer. That is, we place each of the elements of the class of all the integers, odd and even, into a one-to-one correspondence with the elements of the class composed solely of even integers. This process may be continued to the googolplex and beyond. Now, the class of integers is infinite. No integer, no matter how great, can describe its cardinality (or numerosity). Yet, since it is possible to establish a one-to-one correspondence between the class of even numbers and the class of integers, we have succeeded in counting the class of even numbers just as we count a finite collection. The two classes being perfectly matched, we must conclude that they have the same cardinality. That their cardinality is the same we know, just as we knew that the chairs and the people in the hall were equal in number when every chair was occupied and no one was left standing. Thus, we arrive at the fundamental paradox of all infinite classes:—There exist component parts of an infinite class which are just as great as the class itself. the whole is no greater than some