Work: Two Friends Field: two friends Author: Guy de Maupassant Paris was surrounded, starving, at its last gasp. There were fewer and fewer sparrows on the roofs. The sewers had been emptied of their population. People were eating anything they could find. One bright January morning, as Monsieur Morissot, a watchmaker by profession, and a man who loved to take his ease when occasion offered, was strolling in a melancholy mood along the outer boulevard, with his hands in the pockets of his army trousers and a void in his stomach, he ran into a man whom he immediately recognized. It was Monsieur Sauvage, a riverside acquaintance. Every Sunday morning before the war, Monsieur Morissot had been in the habit of setting off early, with a bamboo rod in his hand and a tin box slung on his back. He took the Argenteuil train, got out at Colombes, and walked to the small island which goes by the name of Marante. As soon as he reached this place of his dreams, he settled down to fish, and he fished till nightfall. A tubby, jovial little man was always there before him, a draper from the Rue Notre-Dame-de-Lorette, as fanatical an angler as himself. They frequently spent half the day sitting side-by-side, rod in hand, and their feet dangling over the stream. They had become fast friends. Sometimes they did not talk at all. Sometimes they chatted, but so alike were their tastes and their reactions, and so perfect their understanding of each other, that words were unnecessary. Sometimes, on spring mornings, about ten o’clock, when the early sun had laid on the still surface of the river a faint mist, which flowed with the current, and beat down on the backs of the two enthusiasts with the welcome warmth of the waxing season, Morissot would say to his neighbor, “Lovely, isn’t it?” And Monsieur Sauvage would reply, “I don’t know anything lovelier.” That simple exchange was enough to bring complete understanding between them, and make them like one another the more. On autumn afternoons, when the day was nearing its end and the setting sun reddened the sky, when the water reflected crimson clouds and the far horizon seemed all ablaze, when the figures of the two friends seemed lit by fire, and the trees, already turning red, glowed and shivered with a foretaste of winter, Monsieur Sauvage would smile at Morissot and say: “That’s a sight for sore eyes.” And Morissot, struck with the wonder of it all, but keeping his eyes firmly fixed on his float, would answer: “Better than the boulevard, eh?” No sooner had the two friends recognized each other, than they shook hands warmly, caught up in a little eddy of emotion at meeting thus again in such different circumstances. Monsieur Sauvage sighed and said: “What times we live in!” And Morissot, all gloom, lamented: “And what a lovely day! The first really good weather of the year!” That was undeniable, for the sky was an unclouded, brilliant blue. They walked together, side-by-side, thoughtful and sad. “Remember our fishing?” said Morissot. “Those were the days.” “Will they ever come again, I wonder?” said Monsieur Sauvage. They went into a little café and had an absinthe each. Then they resumed their walk along the pavement. Suddenly Morissot pulled up short: “What about another?” “I’m with you,” said Monsieur Sauvage, and they turned in at a second bar. By the time they left it they were slightly fuddled, as men are apt to be after drinking spirits on an empty stomach. The day was mild, and a pleasant breeze fanned their faces. Monsieur Sauvage had been made more than a little drunk by the air. He stopped and put a question: “Why shouldn’t we have a shot?” “What at?” “Fishing.” “Where?” “At our island, of course. The French outposts are close to Colombes. I know the colonel in command—a chap called Dumoulin. He won’t make any difficulties.” Quivering with anticipation Morissot acquiesced: “Done. I’m with you.” And the two friends separated to get their equipment. An hour later they were striding together down the main road. They reached the villa in which the colonel had established his headquarters. He smiled at their odd request, but readily gave his consent. They started off again, armed with the necessary permit. In next to no time they had crossed the outpost line, passed through Colombes which had been evacuated, and found themselves on the edge of a small vineyard which sloped down to the Seine. It was about eleven o’clock. Opposite them the village of Argenteuil seemed dead. The heights of Orgemont and Sannois dominated the countryside. The great plain which stretches as far as Nanterre was empty, completely empty, with its leafless cherry trees and gray soil. Monsieur Sauvage pointed with his finger at the high ground. “The Prussians are up there,” he said. A sort of paralysis seized upon the two friends as they gazed at the desert before them. The Prussians! They had never set eyes on them, but for months and months they had been conscious of their presence on every side, bringing ruin on France, looting, murdering, spreading starvation, invisible, irresistible. A sort of superstitious dread was added to the hate they felt for that unknown and victorious race. Hesitant and fearful, Morissot said: “Suppose we met some of them?” In spite of everything, the mocking note of the Paris streets sounded in his friend’s reply: “We would offer them a fish fry!” But they still hesitated before venturing into the open country, for they were intimidated by the vast spread of silence round them. It was Monsieur Sauvage who finally took the plunge. “We’d better get going,” he said, “but keep your weather eye open!” They clambered down through the vines, bent double, crawling on hands and knees, taking advantage of the cover offered by the bushes, their ears pricked. They still had a strip of open ground to cross before they could get to the river bank. They broke into a run, and, when they reached it, went to earth in a thicket of dry reeds. Morissot put his ear to the ground to catch the sound of footsteps. He heard nothing. They were alone. Plucking up their courage, they began to fish. Immediately in front, the deserted island of Marante hid them from the other bank. The little restaurant was closed, and looked as though it had been abandoned for years. Monsieur Sauvage caught the first gudgeon, Morissot the second, and then, with scarcely a pause, they kept jerking up their rods with little silver creatures flickering at the end of their lines. A miraculous draught of fish, indeed! Carefully, they put their haul into a fine-meshed net dangling in the water at their feet, and a delicious joy took hold of them, the joy that comes when a favorite pleasure is resumed after long months of deprivation. The kindly sun sent a ripple of warmth between their shoulder blades. There was not a sound to be heard, nor was there a thought in their heads. The world was all forgotten. They were fishing. But, suddenly, a dull, a seemingly subterranean sound made the earth tremble. The big guns were at it again. Morissot turned his head, and above the bank, away to the left, he saw the great bulk of Mont Valérien with, on its head, a white plume, a drift of smoke which it had just spewed out. Almost immediately a second jet of smoke leaped from the summit of the fort, and a few moments later the noise of a second detonation reached their ears. Others followed, and at brief intervals the mount puffed out its death-dealing breath, spreading clouds of milky vapor which slowly rose into the peaceful sky, covering it with a pall. Monsieur Sauvage shrugged. “There they are, at it again,” he said. Morissot, who was anxiously watching the little feather on his float bobbing up and down, was suddenly filled with the anger of a man of peace at the maniacs with no thought for anything but fighting. “Only fools,” he grunted, “would go on killing each other like that!” “They’re worse than fools,” said Monsieur Sauvage. Morissot, who had just landed a fish, burst out with: “Nothing’ll ever change so long as there are governments!” Monsieur Sauvage corrected him: “A republic would never have declared war…” But Morissot cut him short: “With kings there are foreign wars; with republics, civil strife.” Without heat they started arguing the great political issues, showing all the sweet reasonableness of peace-loving men who cannot see beyond their noses. On one thing only they agreed: that mankind would never be free. And all the while Mont Valérien kept thundering, bringing destruction on French homes, grinding flesh and blood to dust, crushing human bodies, and bringing to the hearts of women, girls, and mothers in other lands an endless suffering. “Such is life,” said Monsieur Sauvage. “Say, rather, such is