Work: The Emperor Jones Field: emperor jones Author: Eugene O'Neill Title: SCENE V A large circular clearing, enclosed by the serried ranks of gigantic trunks of tall trees whose tops are lost to view. In the center is a big dead stump worn by time into a curious resemblance to an auction block. The moon floods the clearing with a clear light. jones forces his way in through the forest on the left . He looks wildly about the clearing with hunted, fearful glances. His pants are in tatters, his shoes cut and misshapen, flapping about his feet. He slinks cautiously to the stump in the center and sits down in a tense position, ready for instant flight. Then he holds his head in his hands and rocks back and forth, moaning to himself miserably. Oh, Lawd, Lawd! Oh, Lawd, Lawd! (Suddenly he throws himself on his knees and raises his clasped hands to the sky—in a voice of agonized pleading) Lawd Jesus, heah my prayer! I’se a po’ sinner, a po’ sinner! I knows I done wrong, I knows it! When I cotches Jeff cheatin’ wid loaded dice my anger overcomes me and I kills him dead! Lawd, I done wrong! When dat guard hits me wid de whip, my anger overcomes me, and I kills him dead. Lawd, I done wrong! And down heah whar dese fool bush niggers raises me up to the seat o’ de mighty, I steals all I could grab. Lawd, I done wrong! I knows it! I’se sorry! Forgive me, Lawd! Forgive dis po’ sinner! (Then beseeching terrifiedly) And keep dem away, Lawd! Keep dem away from me! And stop dat drum soundin’ in my ears! Dat begin to sound ha’nted, too. (He gets to his feet, evidently slightly reassured by his prayer—with attempted confidence) De Lawd’ll preserve me from dem ha’nts after dis. (Sits down on the stump again) I ain’t skeered o’ real men. Let dem come. But dem odders—(He shudders—then looks down at his feet, working his toes inside the shoes —with a groan) Oh, my po’ feet! Dem shoes ain’t no use no more ’ceptin’ to hurt. I’se better off widout dem. (He unlaces them and pulls them off—holds the wrecks of the shoes in his hands and regards them mourn fully) You was real, A-one patin’ leather, too. Look at you now. Emperor, you’se gittin’ mighty low! He sighs dejectedly and remains with bowed shoulders, staring down at the shoes in his hands as if reluctant to throw them away. While his attention is thus occupied, a crowd of figures silently enter the clearing from all sides. All are dressed in Southern costumes of the period of the fifties of the last century. There are middle-aged men who are evidently well-to-do planters. There is one spruce, authori tative individual — the auctioneer . There is a crowd of curious spec tators, chiefly young belles and dandies who have come to the slave market for diversion. All exchange courtly greetings in dumb show and chat silently together. There is something stiff, rigid, unreal, marionettish about their movements. They group themselves about the stump. Finally a batch of slaves is led in from the left by an at- tendant — three men of different ages, two women, one with a baby in her arms, nursing. They are placed to the left of the stump, beside jones . The white planters look them over appraisingly as if they were cattle, and exchange judgments on each. The dandies point with their fin gers and make witty remarks. The belles titter bewitchingly. All this in silence save for the ominous throb of the tom-tom. The auctioneer holds up his hand, taking his place at the stump . The groups strain forward attentively. He touches jones on the shoulder peremptorily, motioning for him to stand on the stump—the auction block . jones looks up, sees the figures on all sides, looks wildly for some opening to escape, sees none, screams and leaps madly to the top of the stump to get as far away from them as possible . He stands there, cowering, paralyzed with horror. The auctioneer begins his silent spiel . He points to jones , appeals to the planters to see for them selves . Here is a good field hand, sound in wind and limb as they can see. Very strong still in spite of his being middle aged. Look at that back. Look at those shoulders. Look at the muscles in his arms and his sturdy legs. Capable of any amount of hard labor. Moreover, of a good disposition, intelligent and tractable. Will any gentleman start the bidding? The planters raise their fingers, make their bids . They are apparently all eager to possess jones . The bidding is lively, the crowd interested. While this has been going on, jones has been seized by the courage of desperation . He dares to look down and around him. Over his face abject terror gives way to mystification, to gradual realization—stutteringly. What you all doin’, white folks? What’s all dis? What you all lookin’ at me fo’? What you doin’ wid me, anyhow? (Suddenly convulsed with raging hatred and fear) Is dis a auction? Is you sellin’ me like dey uster befo’ de war? (Jerking out his revolver just as the auctioneer knocks him down to one of the planters—glaring from him to the purchaser) And you sells me? And you buys me? I shows you I’se a free nigger, damn yo’ souls! (He fires at the auctioneer and at the planter with such rapidity that the two shots are almost simultaneous. As if this were a signal the walls of the forest fold in. Only blackness remains and silence broken by jones as he rushes off, crying with fear—and by the quickened, ever louder beat of the tom-tom.)