continue..
man you bring here? Sganarel (making signs with his hand that it is an apothecary). ’Tis— Géronte. What? Sganarel. He— Géronte. Hey! Sganarel. Who— Géronte. I understand you. Sganarel. Your daughter will have occasion for him. Title: SCENE VI Jacqueline. Here, zir, is your daughter, she desires to walk a little. Sganarel. That will do her good. (To leander.) Go to her, Mr. Apothecary, feel her pulse a little, that I may consult with you by and by about her distemper. (Here he takes géronte to one end of the stage, and putting one arm over his shoulder, puts his hand under his chin, to prevent him from turning his head towards leander and lucinda.) Sir, ’tis a great and subtle question among the doctors whether women are more easy to cure than men. Pray hearken to this if you please. Some say No, others say Yes; and for my part, I say both Yes and No, forasmuch as the incongruity of the opaque humours which meet in the natural modification of women being the cause that the brutal part will always bear rule over the sensitive, we see that the inequality of their opinions depends on the oblique motion of the circle of the moon, and as the sun, which darts its rays on the concavity of the earth, finds— Lucinda (to leander). No, I’m not capable of changing my sentiments. Géronte. My daughter speaks! O the great power of medicine! O wonderful physician! How much am I obliged to you, Sir, for this marvellous cure! And what can I do for you, after such a piece of service? Sganarel (walking about the stage, and fanning himself with his hat). This distemper has put me to a vast deal of pains. Lucinda. Yes, Father, I have recovered my speech; but I’ve recovered it to tell you that I will never have any other husband than Leander, and that ’tis in vain you intend to give me Horatio. Géronte. But— Lucinda. Nothing is capable of shaking the resolution I have taken. Géronte. What! Lucinda. You’ll oppose me in vain with fine arguments. Géronte. If— Lucinda. All your talk will signify nothing. Géronte. I— Lucinda. ’Tis a thing I’m determined on. Géronte. But— Lucinda. ’Tis not paternal power that shall oblige me to marry whether I will or not. Géronte. I have— Lucinda. You have liberty to make all your efforts. Géronte. It— Lucinda. My heart cannot submit to this tyranny. Géronte. There— Lucinda. And I’ll rather cast myself into a convent than marry a man I don’t like. Géronte. But— Lucinda. No. By no means. Not at all. You lose your time. I will not do it. That’s resolved. Géronte. Oh! what an impetuosity of speech! There’s no way of resisting it. (To sganarel.) Sir, I desire you’ll make her dumb again. Sganarel. ’Tis a thing which is impossible to me. All I can do to serve you is to make you deaf, if you will. Géronte. I thank you. (To lucinda.) Think then— Lucinda. No, all your reasons will gain nothing on my mind. Géronte. Thou shalt marry Horatio this night. Lucinda. I’ll rather marry death. Sganarel (to géronte). Good now, hold a little, let me prescribe in this affair. ’Tis a disease that affects her, and I know what remedy must be applied to it. Géronte. Is it possible, Sir, that you can likewise cure this sickness of the mind? Sganarel. Yes, let me alone. I have remedies for everything; and our apothecary will assist us in this cure. (To leander.) One word. You see that the affection she has for this Leander is altogether contrary to her father’s will, that there’s no time to lose, that the humours are very acrimonious, and that ’tis necessary to find out speedily a remedy for this illness, which may get ahead by delay; for my part I can see but only one for it, which is a dose of runaway purgative mixed as it should be with two drachms of matrimonium in pills. Perhaps she’ll make some difficulty of taking this medicine, but as you are an able man in your business, it belongs to you to bring her to it, and to make her swallow the thing as well as you can. Go and make her take a little turn in the garden, in order to prepare the humours, whilst I hold her father here in discourse; but above all lose no time. To the remedy, quick, to the specific remedy. Title: SCENE VII Géronte. What drugs, sir, are those you were speaking of? I think that I never heard ’em named before. Sganarel. They are drugs which people make use of upon urgent occasions. Géronte. Did you ever see an insolence like to hers? Sganarel. Girls are sometimes a little headstrong. Géronte. You can’t think how she dotes upon this Leander. Sganarel. The heat of the blood occasions this in young minds. Géronte. For my part, ever since I discovered the violence of this love I have always kept my girl shut up. Sganarel. You have done wisely. Géronte. And I effectually prevented their having any communication together. Sganarel. Mighty well. Géronte. Some folly would have come on’t had I suffered them to see one another. Sganarel. Undoubtedly. Géronte. And I believe the girl would have run away with him. Sganarel. ’Tis well reasoned. Géronte. They tell me that he does his utmost endeavours to come to the speech of her. Sganarel. Ridiculous creature! Géronte. But he’ll lose his time. Sganarel. Ay, ay. Géronte. For I’ll effectually prevent him from seeing of her. Sganarel. He has not to do with a fool; you know tricks that he knows nothing of. He’s no blockhead who is sharper than you. Title: SCENE VIII Lucas. Ad’s bobs, zir, here’s a vine hurly-burly business; your daughter’s fled away with her Liandar. ’Twas he that was the poticary; and there’s Mr. Doctor that ha’ made this vine operation. Géronte. What, murder me in this manner? Here, a commissary, and hinder him from going off. Ah, villain, I’ll make thee suffer the law. Lucas. Ah! I’foith, Mr. Doctor, you shall be hanged; only budge not from hence. Title: SCENE IX Martina (to lucas). Ad’s my life, what plague have I had to find out this house! Tell me some news a little of the doctor I gave you. Lucas. There a is, just going to be hanged. Martina. What, my husband hanged? Alas! what has he done to come to that? Lucas. He ha’ made our maister’s daughter to be carried off. Martina. Alas! my dear husband, is it really true that they are going to hang thee? Sganarel. Thou seest. Ah! Martina. Must thou die in the presence of so many people? Sganarel. What wouldst thou have me do in it? Martina. Yet if thou hadst but made an end of cutting our wood, I could have taken some comfort. Sganarel. Be gone from hence; you break my heart. Martina. No; I’ll stay to encourage thee to die; I’ll not leave thee till I have seen thee hanged. Sganarel. Oh! Title: SCENE X Géronte (to sganarel). The commissary will come presently, and they’ll put you in a place where they shall be answerable to me for you. Sganarel (kneeling). Alas! can’t this be changed into a few strokes of a cudgel? Géronte. No, no, justice shall order it. But what do I see? Title: SCENE XI Leander. Sir, I’m come to make Leander appear before you, and to put Lucinda again in your power. We had both of us a design to go off together, and be married; but this enterprise has given place to a more honourable proceeding. I don’t design to rob you of your daughter, and ’tis from your hand alone that I’ll receive her. What I would say to you, Sir, is that I have just now received letters by which I learn that my uncle is dead, and that I am heir to all his effects. Géronte. Sir, your virtue is to me of sufficient value, and I give you my daughter with the greatest pleasure in the world. Sganarel (aside). There physic has got a notable ’scape! Martina. Since you’ll not be hanged, thank me for your being a doctor; for ’twas I that procured thee that honour. Sganarel. Yes, ’twas you that procured me I know not how many thwacks of a cudgel. Leander (to sganarel). The effect is too good to resent that. Sganarel. Be it so. (To martina.) I forgive thee those blows, in favour of the dignity thou hast raised me to: but prepare thyself from henceforth to live in great respect with a man of my consequence, and consider that the wrath of a physician is more to be feared than can be imagined.