Work: An Enemy of the People Field: enemy of the people Author: Henrik Ibsen Title: ACT I S cene. dr. stockmann’s sitting room . It is evening. The room is plainly but neatly appointed and furnished. In the right-hand wall are two doors; the farther leads out to the hall, the nearer to the doctor’s study. In the left-hand wall, opposite the door leading to the hall, is a door leading to the other rooms occupied by the family. In the middle of the same wall stands the stove, and, further forward, a couch with a looking glass hanging over it and an oval table in front of it. On the table, a lighted lamp, with a lamp shade. At the back of the room, an open door leads to the dining room. billing is seen sitting at the dining table, on which a lamp is burning . He has a napkin tucked under his chin, and mrs. stockmann is standing by the table handing him a large plateful of roast beef . The other places at the table are empty, and the table somewhat in disorder, a meal having evidently recently been finished. Mrs. Stockmann. You see, if you come an hour late, Mr. Billing, you have to put up with cold meat. Billing (as he eats). It is uncommonly good, thank you—remarkably good. Mrs. Stockmann. My husband makes such a point of having his meals punctually, you know— Billing. That doesn’t affect me a bit. Indeed, I almost think I enjoy a meal all the better when I can sit down and eat all by myself and undisturbed. Mrs. Stockmann. Oh well, as long as you are enjoying it—. (Turns to the hall door, listening.) I expect that is Mr. Hovstad coming too. Billing. Very likely. peter stockmann comes in . He wears an overcoat and his official hat, and carries a stick. Peter Stockmann. Good evening, Katherine. Mrs. Stockmann (coming forward into the sitting room). Ah, good evening—is it you? How good of you to come up and see us! Peter Stockmann. I happened to be passing, and so—(looks into the dining room). But you have company with you, I see. Mrs. Stockmann (a little embarrassed). Oh, no—it was quite by chance he came in. (Hurriedly.) Won’t you come in and have something, too? Peter Stockmann. I! No, thank you. Good gracious—hot meat at night! Not with my digestion. Mrs. Stockmann. Oh, but just once in a way— Peter Stockmann. No, no, my dear lady; I stick to my tea and bread and butter. It is much more wholesome in the long run—and a little more economical, too. Mrs. Stockmann (smiling). Now you mustn’t think that Thomas and I are spendthrifts. Peter Stockmann. Not you, my dear; I would never think that of you. (Points to the doctor’s study.) Is he not at home? Mrs. Stockmann. No, he went out for a little turn after supper—he and the boys. Peter Stockmann. I doubt if that is a wise thing to do. (Listens.) I fancy I hear him coming now. Mrs. Stockmann. No, I don’t think it is he. (A knock is heard at the door.) Come in! (hovstad comes in from the hall.) Oh, it is you, Mr. Hovstad! Hovstad. Yes, I hope you will forgive me, but I was delayed at the printer’s. Good evening, Mr. Mayor. Peter Stockmann (bowing a little distantly). Good evening. You have come on business, no doubt. Hovstad. Partly. It’s about an article for the paper. Peter Stockmann. So I imagined. I hear my brother has become a prolific contributor to the “People’s Messenger.” Hovstad. Yes, he is good enough to write in the “People’s Messenger” when he has any home truths to tell. Mrs. Stockmann (to hovstad). But won’t you—? (Points to the dining room.) Peter Stockmann. Quite so, quite so. I don’t blame him in the least, as a writer, for addressing himself to the quarters where he will find the readiest sympathy. And, besides that, I personally have no reason to bear any ill will to your paper, Mr. Hovstad. Hovstad. I quite agree with you. Peter Stockmann. Taking one thing with another, there is an excellent spirit of toleration in the town—an admirable municipal spirit. And it all springs from the fact of our having a great common interest to unite us—an interest that is in an equally high degree the concern of every right-minded citizen— Hovstad. The Baths, yes. Peter Stockmann. Exactly—our fine, new, handsome Baths. Mark my words, Mr. Hovstad—the Baths will become the focus of our municipal life! Not a doubt of it! Mrs. Stockmann. That is just what Thomas says. Peter Stockmann. Think how extraordinarily the place has developed within the last year or two! Money has been flowing in, and there is some life and some business doing in the town. Houses and landed property are rising in value every day. Hovstad. And unemployment is diminishing. Peter Stockmann. Yes, that is another thing. The burden of the poor rates has been lightened, to the great relief of the propertied classes; and that relief will be even greater if only we get a really good summer this year, and lots of visitors—plenty of invalids, who will make the Baths talked about. Hovstad. And there is a good prospect of that, I hear. Peter Stockmann. It looks very promising. Inquiries about apartments and that sort of thing are reaching us every day. Hovstad. Well, the doctor’s article will come in very suitably. Peter Stockmann. Has he been writing something just lately? Hovstad. This is something he wrote in the winter; a recommendation of the Baths—an account of the excellent sanitary conditions here. But I held the article over, temporarily. Peter Stockmann. Ah—some little difficulty about it, I suppose? Hovstad. No, not at all; I thought it would be better to wait till the spring, because it is just at this time that people begin to think seriously about their summer quarters. Peter Stockmann. Quite right; you were perfectly right, Mr. Hovstad. Hovstad. Yes, Thomas is really indefatigable when it is a question of the Baths. Peter Stockmann. Well—remember, he is the Medical Officer to the Baths. Hovstad. Yes, and what is more, they owe their existence to him. Peter Stockmann. To him? Indeed! It is true I have heard from time to time that some people are of that opinion. At the same time I must say I imagined that I took a modest part in the enterprise. Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, that is what Thomas is always saying. Hovstad. But who denies it, Mr. Stockmann? You set the thing going and made a practical concern of it; we all know that. I only meant that the idea of it came first from the doctor. Peter Stockmann. Oh, ideas—yes! My brother has had plenty of them in his time—unfortunately. But when it is a question of putting an idea into practical shape, you have to apply to a man of different mettle, Mr. Hovstad. And I certainly should have thought that in this house at least— Mrs. Stockmann. My dear Peter— Hovstad. How can you think that—? Mrs. Stockmann. Won’t you go in and have something, Mr. Hovstad? My husband is sure to be back directly. Hovstad. Thank you, perhaps just a morsel. (Goes into the dining room.) Peter Stockmann (lowering his voice a little). It is a curious thing that these farmers’ sons never seem to lose their want of tact. Mrs. Stockmann. Surely it is not worth bothering about! Cannot you and Thomas share the credit as brothers? Peter Stockmann. I should have thought so; but apparently some people are not satisfied with a share. Mrs. Stockmann. What nonsense! You and Thomas get on so capitally together. (Listens.) There he is at last, I think. (Goes out and opens the door leading to the hall.) Dr. Stockmann (laughing and talking outside). Look here—here is another guest for you, Katherine. Isn’t that jolly! Come in, Captain Horster; hang your coat up on this peg. Ah, you don’t wear an overcoat. Just think, Katherine; I met him in the street and could hardly persuade him to come up! (captain horster comes into the room and greets mrs. stockmann. He is followed by dr. stockmann.) Come along in, boys. They are ravenously hungry again, you know. Come along, Captain Horster; you must have a slice of beef. (Pushes horster into the dining room. ejlif and morten go in after them.) Mrs. Stockmann. But, Thomas, don’t you see—? Dr. Stockmann (turning in the doorway). Oh, is it you, Peter? (Shakes hands with him.) Now that is very delightful. Peter Stockmann. Unfortunately I must go in a moment— Dr. Stockmann. Rubbish! There is some toddy just coming in. You haven’t forgotten the toddy, Katherine? Mrs. Stockmann. Of course not; the water is boiling now. (Goes into the dining room.) Peter Stockmann. Toddy too! Dr. Stockmann. Yes, sit down and we will have it comfortably. Peter Stockmann. Thanks, I