continue..
from another room; the experimenter, who for the purpose of obtaining the conditioned reflex usually either gave the dog something to eat or put a substance of some kind into the dog’s mouth, was not now in close proximity to the animal, but the result of the stimuli was, nevertheless, the same. It has already been stated that every imaginable phenomenon of the outer world affecting a specific receptive surface of the body may be converted into a conditioned stimulus. After conditioned reflexes had been obtained from the eye, the ear, the nose, and the skin, it was a matter of interest to know what relation the cavity of the mouth had to the general question, and whether a conditioned reflex originated in the mouth. The answer to the inquiry could not be a simple one, because in this case not only the receptive surfaces for the stimuli of the conditioned and of the unconditioned reflex, but also the stimuli themselves were all brought together. Careful observations, however, have made it possible to separate the conditioned stimulus from the unconditioned stimulus even in this instance. When inedible, irritant substances were many times in succession forcibly introduced into the dog’s mouth, we could observe the following facts: If, for instance, a certain amount of acid was poured into the dog’s mouth many times in succession, on each fresh repetition of this procedure, there was regularly a greater flow of saliva; the same thing was repeated on a series of successive days until a certain maximum was attained, whereupon for a considerable time the secretion remained constant. If the experiments were stopped for some days the quantity of saliva secreted became much less. This fact could be very simply explained as follows. On the first administration of the acid solution the secretion of saliva depended principally, or even exclusively, on the unconditioned reflex which the acid caused, while the subsequently occurring increase in secretion pointed to a conditioned reflex gradually formed under the influence of the same acid, and having as its receptor surface also the mouth cavity. We will now consider the conditions which determine the formation of conditioned reflexes. This question taken comprehensively is naturally a vast one. The following account will serve to give you only a slight idea of the full compass of this vast subject. Although there are great differences in the time required for the establishing of a conditioned reflex, some relations have been seen to exist. From our experiments it is evident that the intensity of the stimulus is of essential importance. We have some dogs in which the cooling or warming of a definite place on the skin acted as a conditioned stimulus for the salivary glands. A temperature of zero or 1° C. in an experiment repeated 20 or 30 times caused saliva to flow, whilst a temperature of 4° or 5° C. in an experiment repeated 100 times gave no effect whatever. Exactly the same thing occurs with high temperatures. Heat of 45° C. applied as a conditioned stimulus showed similarly no action after even 100 applications; a temperature of 50°, on the other hand, caused a secretion of saliva after from 20 to 30 applications. In contradistinction to this we must state with regard to acoustic stimuli that very loud sounds such as the violent ringing of a bell did not, in comparison with weaker stimuli, quickly establish a conditioned reflex. It can be assumed that powerful acoustic stimuli call out some other important reaction in the body (e.g., motor), which hinders the development of the salivary response. There is another group of related phenomena which deserves mention. When an odor not naturally exciting the salivary reflex—that of camphor, for instance—is by means of a special apparatus diffused, this diffusion of the odor must be made to coincide 10 or 20 times with the action of the unconditioned stimulus, such as acid poured into the dog’s mouth. But if some of the odoriferous material is added to the acid, the new odor after one or two administrations acts as a conditioned stimulus. It should be asked whether the important circumstance in this experiment is the exact coincidence in time of the conditioned reflex or something else. For the sake of brevity I will entirely omit the technical details, such as by what methods the conditioned reflexes are best obtained; whether with food or with nonfood substances; how many times the various stimuli may be applied in a day; with what length of intermissions, and so on. Next in order comes the important question, What are the stimuli that the nervous system of the dog recognizes as individual phenomena in the outer world? Or, in other words, What are the elements of a stimulus? With regard to this a good deal of evidence is in existence already. If the application of cold to a definite area of the skin (a circle having a diameter of from four to five centimeters) acts as a conditioned stimulus for the salivary glands, the application of cold to any other portion of the skin causes secretion of saliva on the very first occasion. This shows that the stimulation by cold is generalized over a considerable part of the skin, or perhaps even over the whole of it. But the application of cold to the skin is very clearly distinguished as such from the application of heat and from mechanical stimulation. Each of these stimuli must be elaborated separately in order to give a conditioned reflex. Just as in the case of cold, the application to the skin of heat as a conditioned stimulus also generalizes itself. This is equivalent to saying that if an application made to one place on the skin stimulates the salivary glands, an application made to another cutaneous area will also produce a secretion of saliva. Totally different results were yielded by mechanical stimulation of the skin, such as rubbing with a coarse brush (by means of a special apparatus). When this treatment applied to a certain area of the skin had become converted into a conditioned stimulus, the same treatment applied to another place on the skin remained completely ineffective. Other forms of mechanical stimulation, such as pressure with a sharp or a blunt object, proved themselves less effective. Apparently the first mechanical stimulus formed only a small part of the latter. Stimulation by musical sounds or by noises is remarkably convenient for determining the discriminating or analytical faculty of the nervous system of the dog. In this respect the precision of our reaction is very great. If a certain note of an instrument is employed as a conditioned stimulus, it often happens that not only all the notes adjoining it but even those differing from it by a quarter of a tone fail to produce any effect. Musical timbre (quality) is recognized with similar or even with much greater precision. An external agent acts as a conditioned stimulus not only when it comes on the scene but also when it disappears, so that either its beginning or its end may be made the stimulus. Of course, a separate analysis has to be undertaken in order to explain the nature of such stimuli. We have hitherto spoken of the analytical ability of the nervous system as it presents itself to us in, so to say, a finished state. But we have now accumulated material which contains evidence of a continuous and great increase of this ability if the experimenter persists in subdividing and varying the conditioned stimuli. Here, again, is a new field of enormous extent. In the material relating to the various conditioned stimuli, there are not a few cases in which can be seen an evident connection between the intensity of a stimulus and its effect. As soon as a temperature of 50° C. had begun to provoke a flow of saliva, it was found that even 30° C. had a similar but lesser effect. An analogous result may be observed in cases of mechanical stimulation. A diminished rate of rubbing with the brush (5 strokes instead of 25 to 30 strokes per minute) gives less saliva than the ordinary rate of rubbing, and accelerated rubbing (up to 60 strokes per minute) gives more saliva. Furthermore, combinations consisting of stimuli of the same kind and also of stimuli of different kinds were tried. The simplest example is a combination of different musical tones, such as a chord consisting of three tones. When this is employed as a conditioned stimulus, the tones played in pairs and each separate tone of the chord produce an effect, but the pairs produce less saliva than the three together, and the notes played separately less than those played in pairs. The case becomes more complicated when we employ as a conditioned stimulus a combination of stimuli of different kinds, that is, of stimuli acting upon different receptive surfaces. Only a few of such combinations have been provisionally experimented with. In these cases, one of