continue..
order should be? You have only to ask yourself, which shall be the first of the nonterminating decimals to pair with the integer 1, and you have an inkling of the difficulty of the problem. Cantor however assumed that such a pairing does exist, without attempting to give its explicit form. His scheme was: With the integer 1 pair the decimal .aaa…, with the integer 2, .bbb…, etc. Each of the letters represents a digit of the nonterminating decimal in which it appears. The determinate array of pairing between the decimals and the integers would then be: That was Cantor’s array. But at once it was evident that it glaringly exhibited the very contradiction for which he had been seeking. And in this defeat lay his triumph. For no matter how the decimals are arranged, by whatever system, by whatever scheme, it is always possible to construct an infinity of others which are not present in the array. The point is worth repeating: having contrived a general form for an array which we believed would include every decimal, we find, in spite of all our efforts, that some decimals are bound to be omitted. This, Cantor showed by his famous “diagonal proof.” The conditions for determining a decimal omitted from the array are simple. It must differ from the first decimal in the array in its first place, from the second decimal in the array in its second place, from the third decimal in its third place, and so on. But then, it must differ from every decimal in the entire array in at least one place. If (as illustrated in the figure) we draw a diagonal line through our model array and write a new decimal, each digit of which shall differ from every digit intercepted by the diagonal, this new decimal cannot be found in the array. The new decimal may be written: where α differs from a, α differs from b, α from c, α from d, α from e, etc. Accordingly, it will differ from each decimal in at least one place, from the nth decimal in at least its nth place. This proves conclusively that there is no way of including all the decimals in any possible array, no way of pairing them off with the integers. Therefore, as Cantor set out to prove: - The class of transcendental numbers is not only infinite, but also not countable, i.e., nondenumerably infinite. - The real numbers between 0 and 1 are infinite and not countable. - A fortiori, the class of all real numbers is nondenumerable. To the noncountable class of real numbers, Cantor assigned a new transfinite cardinal. It was one of the alephs, but which one remains unsolved to this day. It is suspected that this transfinite, called the “cardinal of the continuum,” which is represented by c or C, is identical with ℵ. But a proof acceptable to most mathematicians has yet to be devised. The arithmetic of C is much the same as that of ℵ. The multiplication table has the same dependable monotone quality. But when C is combined with ℵ, it swallows it completely. Thus: Again, we hope for a variation of the theme when we come to the process of involution. Yet, for the moment, we are disappointed, for . But just as does not equal ℵ, so C does not equal C. We are now in a position to solve our earlier problem in involution, for actually Cantor found that . Likewise C gives rise to a new transfinite, greater than C. This transfinite represents the cardinality of the class of all one-valued functions. It is also one of the ℵ’s, but again, which one is unknown. It is often designated by the letter F. In general, the process of involution, when repeated, continues to generate higher transfinites. Just as the integers served as a measuring rod for classes with the cardinality ℵ, the class of real numbers serves as a measuring rod for classes with the cardinality C. Indeed, there are classes of geometric elements which can be measured in no other way except by the class of real numbers. From the geometric notion of a point, the idea is evolved that on any given line segment there are an infinite number of points. The points on a line segment are also, as mathematicians say, “everywhere dense.” This means that between any two points there is an infinitude of others. The concept of two immediately adjoining points is, therefore, meaningless. This property of being “everywhere dense,” constitutes one of the essential characteristics of a continuum. Cantor, in referring to the “cardinality of the continuum,” recognized that it applies alike to the class of real numbers and the class of points on a line segment. Both are everywhere dense, and both have the same cardinality, C. In other words, it is possible to pair the points on a line segment with the real numbers. Classes with the cardinality C possess a property similar to classes with the cardinality ℵ: they may be thinned out without in any way affecting their cardinality. In this connection, we see in very striking fashion another illustration of the principle of transfinite arithmetic, that the whole is no greater than many of its parts. For instance, it can be proved that there are as many points on a line one foot long as there are on a line one yard long. The line segment AB in the figure below is [about] three times as long as the line A′B′. Nevertheless, it is possible to put the class of all points on the segment AB into a one-to-one correspondence with the class of points on the segment A′B′. Let L be the intersection of the lines AA′ and BB′. If then to any point M of AB, there corresponds a point M′ of A′B′, which is on the line LM, we have established the desired correspondence between the class of points on A′B′ and those on AB. It is easy to see intuitively and to prove geometrically that this is always possible, and that, therefore, the cardinality of the two classes of points is the same. Thus, since A′B′ is smaller than AB, it may be considered a proper part of AB, and we have again established that an infinite class may contain as proper parts, subclasses equivalent to it. There are more startling examples in geometry which illustrate the power of the continuum. Although the statement that a line one inch in length contains as many points as a line stretching around the equator, or as a line stretching from the earth to the most distant stars, is startling enough, it is fantastic to think that a line segment one-millionth of an inch long has as many points as there are in all three-dimensional space in the entire universe. Nevertheless, this is true. Once the principles of Cantor’s theory of transfinites is understood, such statements cease to sound like the extravagances of a mathematical madman. The oddities, as Russell has said, “then become no odder than the people at the antipodes who used to be thought impossible because they would find it so inconvenient to stand on their heads.” Even conceding that the treatment of the infinite is a form of mathematical madness, one is forced to admit, as does the Duke in Measure for Measure: Poem ```If she be mad—as I believe no other— Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense, Such a dependency of thing on thing, As e’er I heard in madness.``` Until now we have deliberately avoided a definition of “infinite class.” But at last our equipment makes it possible to do so. We have seen that an infinite class, whether its cardinality is ℵ, C, or greater, can be thinned out in a countless variety of ways, without affecting its cardinality. In short, the whole is no greater than many of its parts. Now, this property does not belong to finite classes at all; it belongs only to infinite classes. Hence, it is a unique method of determining whether a class is finite or infinite. Thus, our definition reads: An infinite class is one which can be put into one-to-one reciprocal correspondence with a proper subset of itself. Equipped with this definition and the few ideas we have gleaned we may re-examine some of the paradoxes of Zeno. That of Achilles and the tortoise may be expressed as follows: Achilles and the tortoise, running the same course, must each occupy the same number of distinct positions during their race. However, if Achilles is to catch his more leisurely and determined opponent, he will have to occupy more positions than the tortoise, in the same elapsed period of time. Since this is manifestly impossible, you may put your money on the tortoise. But don’t be too hasty. There are better ways of saving money than merely counting change. In fact, you had best bet on Achilles after all,