continue..
allowed ourselves to be misled by misrepresentation of the state of affairs— Dr. Stockmann. Misrepresentation—! Hovstad. Well, let us say a not entirely trustworthy representation. The Mayor’s statement has proved that. I hope no one here has any doubt as to my liberal principles; the attitude of the “People’s Messenger” towards important political questions is well known to everyone. But the advice of experienced and thoughtful men has convinced me that in purely local matters a newspaper ought to proceed with a certain caution. Aslaksen. I entirely agree with the speaker. Hovstad. And, in the matter before us, it is now an undoubted fact that Dr. Stockmann has public opinion against him. Now, what is an editor’s first and most obvious duty, gentlemen? Is it not to work in harmony with his readers? Has he not received a sort of tacit mandate to work persistently and assiduously for the welfare of those whose opinions he represents? Or is it possible I am mistaken in that? Voices from the crowd. No, no! You are quite right! Hovstad. It has cost me a severe struggle to break with a man in whose house I have been lately a frequent guest—a man who till today has been able to pride himself on the undivided good will of his fellow citizens—a man whose only, or at all events whose essential, failing is that he is swayed by his heart rather than his head. A few scattered voices. That is true! Bravo, Stockmann! Hovstad. But my duty to the community obliged me to break with him. And there is another consideration that impels me to oppose him, and, as far as possible, to arrest him on the perilous course he has adopted; that is, consideration for his family— Dr. Stockmann. Please stick to the water supply and drainage! Hovstad. —consideration, I repeat, for his wife and his children for whom he has made no provision. Morten. Is that us, mother? Mrs. Stockmann. Hush! Aslaksen. I will now put the Mayor’s proposition to the vote. Dr. Stockmann. There is no necessity! Tonight I have no intention of dealing with all that filth down at the Baths. No; I have something quite different to say to you. Peter Stockmann (aside). What is coming now? A Drunken Man (by the entrance door). I am a ratepayer! And therefore I have a right to speak too! And my entire—firm—inconceivable opinion is— A number of voices. Be quiet, at the back there! Others. He is drunk! Turn him out! (They turn him out.) Dr. Stockmann. Am I allowed to speak? Aslaksen (ringing his bell). Dr. Stockmann will address the meeting. Dr. Stockmann. I should like to have seen anyone, a few days ago, dare to attempt to silence me as has been done tonight! I would have defended my sacred rights as a man, like a lion! But now it is all one to me; I have something of even weightier importance to say to you. The crowd presses nearer to him, morten kiil conspicuous among them . Dr. Stockmann (continuing). I have thought and pondered a great deal, these last few days—pondered over such a variety of things that in the end my head seemed too full to hold them— Peter Stockmann (with a cough). Ahem! Dr. Stockmann. —but I got them clear in my mind at last, and then I saw the whole situation lucidly. And that is why I am standing here tonight. I have a great revelation to make to you, my fellow citizens! I will impart to you a discovery of a far wider scope than the trifling matter that our water supply is poisoned and our medicinal Baths are standing on pestiferous soil. A number of voices (shouting). Don’t talk about the Baths! We won’t hear you! None of that! Dr. Stockmann. I have already told you that what I want to speak about is the great discovery I have made lately—the discovery that all the sources of our moral life are poisoned and that the whole fabric of our civic community is founded on the pestiferous soil of falsehood. Voices of disconcerted Citizens. What is that he says? Peter Stockmann. Such an insinuation—! Aslaksen (with his hand on his bell). I call upon the speaker to moderate his language. Dr. Stockmann. I have always loved my native town as a man only can love the home of his youthful days. I was not old when I went away from here; and exile, longing and memories cast as it were an additional halo over both the town and its inhabitants. (Some clapping and applause.) And there I stayed, for many years, in a horrible hole far away up north. When I came into contact with some of the people that lived scattered about among the rocks, I often thought it would of been more service to the poor half-starved creatures if a veterinary doctor had been sent up there, instead of a man like me. (Murmurs among the crowd.) Billing (laying down his pen). I’m damned if I have ever heard—! Hovstad. It is an insult to a respectable population! Dr. Stockmann. Wait a bit! I do not think anyone will charge me with having forgotten my native town up there. I was like one of the eider ducks brooding on its nest, and what I hatched was—the plans for these Baths. (Applause and protests.) And then when fate at last decreed for me the great happiness of coming home again—I assure you, gentlemen, I thought I had nothing more in the world to wish for. Or rather, there was one thing I wished for—eagerly, untiringly, ardently—and that was to be able to be of service to my native town and the good of the community. Peter Stockmann (looking at the ceiling). You chose a strange way of doing it—ahem! Dr. Stockmann. And so, with my eyes blinded to the real facts, I reveled in happiness. But yesterday morning—no, to be precise, it was yesterday afternoon—the eyes of my mind were opened wide, and the first thing I realized was the colossal stupidity of the authorities—. (Uproar, shouts and laughter. mrs. stockmann coughs persistently.) Peter Stockmann. Mr. Chairman! Aslaksen (ringing his bell). By virtue of my authority—! Dr. Stockmann. It is a petty thing to catch me up on a word, Mr. Aslaksen. What I mean is only that I got scent of the unbelievable piggishness our leading men had been responsible for down at the Baths. I can’t stand leading men at any price!—I have had enough of such people in my time. They are like billy goats in a young plantation; they do mischief everywhere. They stand in a free man’s way, whichever way he turns, and what I should like best would be up to see them exterminated like any other vermin—. (Uproar.) Peter Stockmann. Mr. Chairman, can we allow such expressions to pass? Aslaksen (with his hand on his bell). Doctor—! Dr. Stockmann. I cannot understand how it is that I have only now acquired a clear conception of what these gentry are, when I had almost daily before my eyes in this town such an excellent specimen of them—my brother Peter—slow-witted and hidebound in prejudice—. Laughter, uproar and hisses. mrs. stockmann sits coughing assiduously . aslaksen rings his bell violently . The Drunken Man (who has got in again). Is it me he is talking about? My name’s Petersen, all right—but devil take me if I— Angry Voices. Turn out that drunken man! Turn him out. (He is turned out again.) Peter Stockmann. Who was that person? 1st Citizen. I don’t know who he is, Mr. Mayor. 2nd Citizen. He doesn’t belong here. 3rd Citizen. I expect he is a navvy from over at (the rest is inaudible). Aslaksen. He had obviously had too much beer. Proceed, Doctor; but please strive to be moderate in your language. Dr. Stockmann. Very well, gentlemen, I will say no more about our leading men. And if anyone imagines, from what I have just said, that my object is to attack these people this evening, he is wrong—absolutely wide of the mark. For I cherish the comforting conviction that these parasites—all these venerable relics of a dying school of thought—are most admirably paving the way for their own extinction; they need no doctor’s help to hasten their end. Nor is it folk of that kind who constitute the most pressing danger to the community. It is not they who are most instrumental in poisoning the sources of our moral life and infecting the ground on which we stand. It is not they who are the most dangerous enemies of truth and freedom among us. Shouts from all sides. Who then? Who is it? Name! Name! Dr. Stockmann. You may depend upon it I shall name them! That is precisely the great discovery I made yesterday. (Raises his voice.) The most dangerous enemy of truth and freedom among us is the compact majority—yes, the