Work: The Misanthrope Field: misanthrope Author: Molière Title: ACT IV Title: SCENE I Philintes. No, never was there a soul seen of so obstinate a make, nor an accommodation more difficult to be brought about; in vain did they endeavour to wind and turn him all ways, there was no drawing him from his opinion, and, in my thoughts, never did so whimsical a difference employ the prudence of these gentlemen. “No, gentlemen,” said he, “I won’t retract, and shall agree to anything, barring this point. What is he affronted at? And what would he have me say? What is it over with him as to honour, if he can’t write well? What harm did my advice do him, which he took so heinously? One may be a worthy man and write bad verses; these affairs touch not at all upon the point of honour. I esteem him a gallant man in all respects, a man of quality, of merit, and courage, everything you please, but he’s a very bad author. I’ll praise, if you please, his train and his expense, his skill in horsemanship, in arms, in dancing. But for commending his verses, I am his humble servant; and when one has not the happiness to write well in that way, one should have no itch after rhyming, on pain of being cast for one’s life.” In short, all the favour and agreement that he could, with the utmost efforts, bring himself to stoop to, was to say (thinking to soften his style greatly), “Sir, I am sorry I am so difficult to please; and out of respect to you, I could have wished with all my soul to have thought your late song better”; and to conclude, they obliged ’em to close the whole proceeding in an embrace. Éliante. He is very singular in his way of acting, but I have, I own it, a particular value for him: and the sincerity he piques himself upon has something noble and heroic in it. ’Tis a virtue very rare in this present age, and I could wish to see it in everybody as it is in him. Philintes. For my part, the more I see him the more am I astonished at this passion he so abandons himself to. Being of the humour Heaven has formed him with, I can’t imagine how he takes it into his head to be in love; and less still can I imagine how your cousin should be the person his fancy inclines him to. Éliante. This lets us sufficiently see that love is not always the product of a resemblance of humours; and in this example all those accounts of tender sympathies are falsified. Philintes. But d’ye think, by what appears, that she loves him? Éliante. That’s a point not very easy to be known. How can one judge whether she loves him in reality? That heart of hers is not, even itself, very sure what it thinks; it loves sometimes without knowing very well why, and fancies too at other times that it loves when there is nothing in’t. Philintes. I believe our friend will find more vexation with this cousin o’ yours than he imagines; and to say the truth, had he my heart he would turn his addresses quite to another quarter; and we should see him, madam, by a choice much more just, make his use of the kindness you discover for him. Éliante. For my part, I use no disguise in the matter, and I think one should be sincere in these points. I don’t oppose his passion at all; on the contrary I interest myself in it: and if the thing stuck only at me, I myself, the world should see, would join him to her he loves; but if in such a choice, as it possibly may happen, his passion should try its fate another way, and it must be so that he should make somebody else happy, I could resolve upon receiving his addresses; and his being refused in such an affair would not create in me any aversion to him. Philintes. And I, madam, on my part, do not at all oppose that kindness your beauty entertains for him: and he himself, if he please, can fully acquaint you with what I have taken care to tell him upon this subject. But if by their being united in marriage, you should be out of a capacity of receiving his addresses, all mine should attempt that glorious favour, which with so much goodness you present him with. Happy, madam, if when your heart can withdraw itself from him, it might but fall to my share. Éliante. You are pleased to be merry, Philintes. Philintes. No, madam, I speak now from the bottom of my soul; I wait the occasion of making you an offer without reserve, and with all my wishes impatiently wait for that moment. Title: SCENE II Alcestes. Ah! madam, do me justice for an offence which has just now triumphed over all my constancy. Éliante. What’s the matter? what has disturbed you? Alcestes. Something ails me, which ’tis death to think of; and the dissolution of all nature had not oppressed me like this adventure. ’Tis over with me—my love—I can’t speak. Éliante. Endeavour to recover your spirits a little. Alcestes. O just Heaven! must the odious vices of the basest minds be joined to so many charms? Éliante. But pray who can— Alcestes. Ah! all is ruined, I am, I am betrayed, I am murdered. Célimène—could one have believed this news? Célimène deceives me, and is no better than a faithless wretch. Éliante. Have you just grounds to believe it? Philintes. Perhaps ’tis a suspicion lightly conceived; your jealous temper sometimes takes chimeras— Alcestes. Oh! s’death, sir, meddle you with your own affairs. (To éliante.) ’Tis being but too certain of her treachery, to have a letter in my pocket under her own hand. Yes, madam, a letter writ to Orontes has set before my eyes my disgrace, and her shame. Orontes. whose addresses I thought she avoided, and whom I dreaded the least of all my rivals. Philintes. A letter may deceive us by appearance, and is not so culpable sometimes as one thinks it. Alcestes. Once more, sir, pray leave me, and trouble yourself only about your own concerns. Éliante. You should moderate your passion, and the injury— Alcestes. This work, madam, belongs to you, ’tis to you that my heart has now recourse for power to free itself from this galling affliction. Revenge me of your ungrateful and perfidious relation, who basely betrays so constant a passion; revenge me for this stroke which ought to raise your horror. Éliante. I revenge you! How? Alcestes. In receiving my heart. Accept it, madam, in room of the faithless creature: ’tis that way I can take vengeance on her; and I will punish her by the sincere addresses, by the profound love, the respectful concern, the earnest devoirs, and the assiduous service, which this heart shall offer you as an ardent sacrifice. Éliante. I sympathize with you, doubtless, in what you suffer, and don’t despise the heart you offer me; but perhaps the harm is not so great as you think it, and you may lay aside this desire of vengeance; when the injury proceeds from an object full of charms, one forms many designs one never executes. In vain do we see powerful reason to part, the beloved criminal is presently innocent; all the harm we wish easily vanishes, and ’tis very well known what the anger of a lover is. Alcestes. No, no, madam, no. The crime is mortal, there’s no return, and I absolutely break with her; nothing shall change the resolution I have fixed of doing it, and I should be my own tormentor ever to love her more. Here she is; my passion doubles at her approach. I’ll go reproach her in the most lively manner for her black ingratitude, absolutely confound her, and after that bring you back a heart entirely disengaged from her delusive charms. Title: SCENE III Alcestes (aside). Oh Heaven! can I be now master of my transports? Célimène (aside). Hey, hey! (To alcestes.) What confusion is this you are in? What means that sighing, and those gloomy looks you cast upon me? Alcestes. That all the horrors a soul is capable of have nothing in them comparable to your perfidies; that fate, devils, and incensed Heaven never produced anything so wicked as yourself. Célimène. This is certainly an admirable way of courtship. Alcestes. Nay, none of your jests, ’tis no time to laugh; much rather blush, you have reason for it. I have sure proofs of your treachery. This is what the perplexities of my heart had pointed out; ’twas not in vain that my affection was alarmed. By those frequent suspicions, which you abhorred, I searched after the misfortune my eyes have hit upon; and in spite of all your