Work: On the Nature of Calculus Field: on the nature of calculus Author: Alfred North Whithead Title: Signs Words, spoken or written, and the symbols of Mathematics are alike signs. Signs have been analysed into (α) suggestive signs, (β) expressive signs, (γ) substitutive signs. A suggestive sign is the most rudimentary possible, and need not be dwelt upon here. An obvious example of one is a knot tied in a handkerchief to remind the owner of some duty to be performed. In the use of expressive signs the attention is not fixed on the sign itself but on what it expresses; that is to say, it is fixed on the meaning conveyed by the sign. Ordinary language consists of groups of expressive signs, its primary object being to draw attention to the meaning of the words employed. Language, no doubt, in its secondary uses has some of the characteristics of a system of substitutive signs. It remedies the inability of the imagination to bring readily before the mind the whole extent of complex ideas by associating these ideas with familiar sounds or marks; and it is not always necessary for the attention to dwell on the complete meaning while using these symbols. But with all this allowance it remains true that language when challenged by criticism refers us to the meaning and not to the natural or conventional properties of its symbols for an explanation of its processes. A substitutive sign is such that in thought it takes the place of that for which it is substituted. A counter in a game may be such a sign: at the end of the game the counters lost or won may be interpreted in the form of money, but till then it may be convenient for attention to be concentrated on the counters and not on their signification. The signs of a Mathematical Calculus are substitutive signs. The difference between words and substitutive signs has been stated thus, “a word is an instrument for thinking about the meaning which it expresses; a substitute sign is a means of not thinking about the meaning which it symbolizes.” The use of substitutive signs in reasoning is to economize thought. 2. Definition of a Calculus. In order that reasoning may be conducted by means of substitutive signs, it is necessary that rules be given for the manipulation of the signs. The rules should be such that the final state of the signs after a series of operations according to rule denotes, when the signs are interpreted in terms of the things for which they are substituted, a proposition true for the things represented by the signs. The art of the manipulation of substitutive signs according to fixed rules, and of the deduction therefrom of true propositions is a Calculus. We may therefore define a sign used in a Calculus as “an arbitrary mark, having a fixed interpretation, and susceptible of combination with other signs in subjection to fixed laws dependent upon their mutual interpretation.” The interpretation of any sign used in a series of operations must be fixed in the sense of being the same throughout, but in a certain sense it may be ambiguous. For instance in ordinary Algebra a letter x may be used in a series of operations, and x may be defined to be any algebraical quantity, without further specification of the special quantity chosen. Such a sign denotes any one of an assigned class with certain unambiguously defined characteristics. In the same series of operations the sign must always denote the same member of the class; but as far as any explicit definitions are concerned any member will do. When once the rules for the manipulation of the signs of a calculus are known, the art of their practical manipulation can be studied apart from any attention to the meaning to be assigned to the signs. It is obvious that we can take any marks we like and manipulate them according to any rules we choose to assign. It is also equally obvious that in general such occupations must be frivolous. They possess a serious scientific value when there is a similarity of type of the signs and of the rules of manipulation to those of some calculus in which the marks used are substitutive signs for things and relations of things. The comparative study of the various forms produced by variation of rules throws light on the principles of the calculus. Furthermore the knowledge thus gained gives facility in the invention of some significant calculus designed to facilitate reasoning with respect to some given subject. It enters therefore into the definition of a calculus properly so called that the marks used in it are substitutive signs. But when a set of marks and the rules for their arrangements and rearrangements are analogous to those of a significant calculus so that the study of the allowable forms of their arrangements throws light on that of the calculus, or when the marks and their rules of arrangement are such as appear likely to receive an interpretation as substitutive signs or to facilitate the invention of a true calculus, then the art of arranging such marks may be called—by an extension of the term—an uninterpreted calculus. The study of such a calculus is of scientific value. The marks used in it will be called signs or symbols as are those of a true calculus, thus tacitly suggesting that there is some unknown interpretation which could be given to the calculus. 3. Equivalence. It is necessary to note the form in which propositions occur in a calculus. Such a form may well be highly artificial from some points of view, and may yet state the propositions in a convenient form for the eliciting of deductions. Furthermore it is not necessary to assert that the form is a general form into which all judgments can be put by the aid of some torture. It is sufficient to observe that it is a form of wide application. In a calculus of the type here considered propositions take the form of assertions of equivalence. One thing or fact, which may be complex and involve an interrelated group of things or a succession of facts, is asserted to be equivalent in some sense or other to another thing or fact. Accordingly the sign = is taken to denote that the signs or groups of signs on either side of it are equivalent, and therefore symbolize things which are so far equivalent. When two groups of symbols are connected by this sign, it is to be understood that one group may be substituted for the other group whenever either occurs in the calculus under conditions for which the assertion of equivalence holds good. The idea of equivalence requires some explanation. Two things are equivalent when for some purpose they can be used indifferently. Thus the equivalence of distinct things implies a certain defined purpose in view, a certain limitation of thought or of action. Then within this limited field no distinction of property exists between the two things. As an instance of the limitation of the field of equivalence consider an ordinary algebraical equation, f(x, y)=0. Then in finding by the formula, we may not substitute 0 for f on the right-hand side of the last equation, though the equivalence of the two symbols has been asserted in the first equation, the reason being that the limitations under which f=0 has been asserted are violated when f undergoes partial differentiation. The idea of equivalence must be carefully distinguished from that of mere identity. No investigations which proceed by the aid of propositions merely asserting identities such as A is A, can ever result in anything but barren identities. Equivalence on the other hand implies non-identity as its general case. Identity may be conceived as a special limiting case of equivalence. For instance in arithmetic we write, 2+3=3+2. This means that, in so far as the total number of objects mentioned, 2+3 and 3+2 come to the same number, namely 5. But 2+3 and 3+2 are not identical; the order of the symbols is different in the two combinations, and this difference of order directs different processes of thought. The importance of the equation arises from its assertion that these different processes of thought are identical as far as the total number of things thought of is concerned. From this arithmetical point of view it is tempting to define equivalent things as being merely different ways of thinking of the same thing as it exists in the external world. Thus there is a certain aggregate, say of 5 things, which is thought of in different ways, as 2+3 and as 3+2. A sufficient objection to this definition is that the man who shall succeed in stating intelligibly the distinction between himself and the rest of the world will have solved the central problem of philosophy. As there is no universally accepted solution of this problem, it is obviously undesirable