continue..
cry. I was jealous of the hussar. The old princess paid a visit to my mother as she had promised. My mother did not like her. I was not present at their interview, but at dinner my mother told my father that this Princess Zasyekin struck her as une femme très vulgaire, that she had wearied her out with her requests to intercede on her behalf with Prince Sergey, that she seemed to be involved in some lawsuits and shady business deals—des vilaines affaires d’argent—and that she must be a thoroughly unpleasant woman. My mother, however, added that she had asked her and her daughter to dinner the next day (hearing the words “and her daughter,” I buried my nose in my plate), because she was, after all, a neighbour and a titled woman. Upon which my father informed my mother that he now remembered who this lady was; that when he was a young man he had known the late Prince Zasyekin, a highly cultured but frivolous and ridiculous man; that in society he was known as “le Parisien” because he had lived in Paris for a long time; that he had been very rich but had gambled away his entire fortune, and for some unknown reason, probably for money—“though he could have made a much better choice,” my father added with a cold smile—married the daughter of some departmental clerk and after his marriage had begun speculating and completely ruined himself. “I do hope she’s not going to ask for a loan,” observed my mother. “I should not be in the least surprised,” my father said calmly. “Does she speak French?” “Very badly.” “I see. However, that doesn’t matter. I think you said you’d also asked her daughter? Someone was telling me that she was a very charming and well-educated girl.” “Oh? Then she can’t take after her mother.” “No, nor after her father,” said my father. “He was cultured too, but a fool.” My mother sighed and sank into thought. My father was silent. I felt very uncomfortable during this conversation. After dinner I went into the garden, but without my gun. I vowed not to go near the “Zasyekin garden,” but an irresistible force drew me there, and I was not disappointed. For I had hardly reached the fence when I caught sight of Zinaida. This time she was alone. She had a book in her hand and was Walking slowly along the path. She did not notice me. I nearly let her pass by, but suddenly recollected myself and coughed. She turned round but did not stop. With her hand she pushed back the broad blue ribbon of her round straw hat, looked at me, smiled gently, and again dropped her eyes to the book. I took off my cap and, after hesitating a little, walked away with a heavy heart. “Que suis je pour elle [What am I to her]?” I thought (goodness only knows why!) in French. Familiar footsteps sounded behind me: I looked round—my father was coming towards me with his light, quick step. “Is that the young princess?” he asked me. “Yes.” “Do you know her?” “I saw her this morning at the old princess’s.” My father stopped and, turning sharply on his heels, went back. Drawing level with Zinaida, he bowed to her courteously. She too bowed to him—not without some surprise, though—and lowered her book. I saw how she followed him with her eyes. My father always dressed very exquisitely and simply and in a style all his own; but never before had his figure struck me as more elegant, and never before had his grey hat sat more handsomely on his barely perceptibly thinning hair. I walked towards Zinaida, but she did not even glance at me. She raised her book again and walked away. I spent the whole of that evening and the following morning in a state of stunned misery. I remember I tried to work and opened Kaydanov, but the clearly printed lines and pages of the celebrated text-book flashed before my eyes in vain. A dozen times over I read the words: “Julius Caesar was distinguished for martial valour,” but did not understand a word and threw the book down. Before dinner I pomaded my hair again and again put on my new coat and cravat. “What’s this for?” asked my mother. “You’re not a university student yet, and heaven knows whether you’ll ever pass your examinations. Besides, how long is it since I bought you your tunic? You’re not going to throw it away, are you?” “We’re going to have visitors,” I whispered almost in despair. “What nonsense! Visitors indeed!” I had to give in. I changed the coat for my tunic, but I did not take off the cravat. The princess and her daughter arrived half an hour before dinner. The old woman had thrown a yellow shawl over the green dress in which I had seen her before and put on an old-fashioned bonnet with flame-coloured ribbons. She began talking at once about her bills of exchange, sighing and complaining about her poverty, and went on and on about it without apparently feeling in the least humiliated: she took snuff as noisily as before and fidgeted and turned about on her chair as freely as ever. It never seemed to occur to her that she was a princess. Zinaida, on the other hand, carried herself very gravely, even haughtily, like a true princess. An expression of cold immobility and dignity appeared on her face, and she seemed quite a different person to me; I could discover no trace of the glances, the smiles I knew so well, though in this new guise, too, she seemed beautiful to me. She wore a light barège dress with a pale blue pattern; her hair fell in long curls down her cheeks, in the English fashion. This way of doing her hair went well with the cold expression on her face, My father sat beside her during dinner and entertained his neighbour with his usual exquisite and calm courtesy. From time to time he glanced at her, and she too looked at him now and again, but so strangely, almost with hostility. Their conversation was carried on in French; I remember I was surprised by the purity of Zinaida’s pronunciation. The old princess was, as before, not in the least put out at dinner, eating a lot and praising the dishes. My mother was obviously bored by her and answered her with a sort of melancholy disdain. Now and then my father frowned a little. My mother did not like Zinaida either. “Very proud, isn’t she?” she said the next day. “And what has she to be so proud about, I wonder—avec sa mine de grisette [with her grisette expression]?” “You’ve evidently never seen any grisettes,” observed my father. “No, I haven’t, thank God!” “Yes indeed, thank God—only how on earth can you form an opinion of them?” Zinaida had paid no attention whatsoever to me. Soon after dinner the old princess began to take her leave. “I shall count on your good offices, madam, and on yours too, sir,” she said in a sing-song voice to my mother and father. “I’m afraid there’s nothing we can do about it. We’ve had our good times, but they’re gone, so here I am, a Highness,” she added with an unpleasant laugh, “but what’s the use of a title if you’re starving?” My father bowed to her respectfully and saw her off to the front door. There I stood, in my short tunic, staring at the floor as though under sentence of death. Zinaida’s treatment of me had crushed me completely. Imagine my surprise when, as she passed by me, she said in a rapid whisper and with the former affectionate look in her eyes, “Come and see us at eight o’clock. Do you hear? Without fail!” I did not know what to make of it, but she was already gone, throwing a white scarf over her head. Punctually at eight o’clock, in my tail-coat, with a raised quiff of hair, I entered the passage of the cottage where the princess lived. The old servant scowled at me and got up unwillingly from the bench. I could hear gay voices in the drawing room. I opened the door and stepped back in astonishment. In the middle of the room, on a chair, stood the young princess, holding a man’s hat in front of her; about half a dozen men crowded round the chair. They were trying to put their hands into the hat, while she kept raising it and shaking it violently. On seeing me she cried, “Wait, wait, another visitor! I must give him a ticket too,” and, jumping lightly off the chair, she took me by the cuff of my coat. “Come along,” she said. “What are you standing there for? Gentlemen, let me introduce you: this is M’sieu Woldemar, our neighbour’s son. And these,”