continue..
“I’ll go to the garden.” I dressed quickly and slipped out of the house. The night was dark. The trees scarcely whispered; a gentle chill fell from the sky; the scent of fennel came from the kitchen-garden. I walked through all the avenues; the light sound of my own footsteps disturbed and at the same time emboldened me; every now and then I stopped dead, waited, and listened to my heart beating fast and heavily. At last I went up to the fence and leaned against a stake. Suddenly—or did I imagine it?—a woman’s figure flashed by a few paces from me. I stared intently into the darkness; I held my breath…. What was that? Did I hear steps, or was it again the beating of my heart? “Who is there?” I murmured, almost inaudibly. What was that again? A smothered laugh? Or the rustling of leaves? Or a sigh close to my ear? I felt frightened. “Who is it?” I repeated, still more softly. A slight breeze came and went in a moment; a streak of fire flashed across the sky—a falling star. “Zinaida?” I was about to ask, but the sound died on my lips. And suddenly everything became profoundly still all round me, as often happens in the middle of the night. Even the cicadas ceased whirring in the trees—only a window was slammed to somewhere. I stood and stood and then went back to my room, to my bed, which had grown quite cold by then. I felt a strange excitement, as though I had gone to a rendezvous and had been left out in the cold, passing by another man’s happiness. The next day I only caught a glimpse of Zinaida: she was driving somewhere with the old princess in a cab. I did see Lushin, though, who barely acknowledged my greeting, and Malevsky. The young count grinned and began talking to me very amiably. Of all the visitors to the cottage, he alone had managed to worm himself into our house. My mother took a liking to him. My father was not particularly friendly with him and treated him with almost offensive politeness. “Ah, Monsieur le page,” began Malevsky. “Very glad to meet you. What is your beautiful queen doing?” His fresh, handsome face was so detestable to me at that moment and he was looking at me with such a playfully contemptuous expression at that moment that I did not answer him at all. “Are you still angry with me?” he went on. “You shouldn’t be, you know. It wasn’t I who called you a page. Besides, queens usually have pages. But I hope you won’t mind my telling you that you are performing your duties very badly.” “Oh?” “Pages should never be far away from their mistresses. Pages should know everything their mistresses do; they should even watch them,” he added, lowering his voice, “day and night.” “What do you mean by that?” “What do I mean? I believe I’ve made myself perfectly clear. Day—and night. In the daytime it doesn’t matter very much. It is light by day, and there are lots of people about. But by night—ah, that’s when you should expect trouble. I advise you not to sleep at night and watch, watch with all your might. Remember? At night, in the garden, by the fountain—that’s where you must keep watch. You’ll thank me for it.” Malevsky laughed and turned his back on me. I don’t suppose he attached any great importance to what he had said to me. He had the reputation of a man who was very good at mystifying people, and he was famed for his ability to make fools of people at fancy-dress balls, greatly enhanced by his almost unconscious mendacity, which permeated his whole being…. He just wanted to tease me, but every word he uttered ran like poison through my veins. The blood rushed to my head. “Oh, so that’s what it is,” I said to myself. “Very well, it was not for nothing that I felt drawn into the garden! Well, then, it shall not be!” I exclaimed loudly, striking myself on the chest with my fist, though I had no clear idea what exactly it was that was not to be. “Whether it is Malevsky himself who goes into the garden,” I thought (he might have let the cat out of the bag; he certainly was impudent enough for that), “or whether it was someone else” (the fence of our garden was very low, and there was no difficulty in climbing over it), “whoever I happen to come across will be sorry for it! I should not advise anyone to cross my path! I’ll prove to all the world and to her, the traitress”—I actually called her a traitress—“that I know how to be revenged!” I went back to my room, took out of the writing desk an English penknife I had recently bought, felt the sharp edge, and knitting my brows, thrust it into my pocket with a look of cold and concentrated determination, just as though I was quite used to such things and had done them many times before. My heart was full of malice and turned to stone; I kept frowning all day and from time to time would walk up and down with compressed lips, my hand in my pocket clutching the knife, grown warm in my grasp, while I was preparing myself beforehand for something terrible. These new and never-before-experienced sensations absorbed me and even delighted me so much that I scarcely thought of Zinaida herself. All the time I imagined I could see Pushkin’s Aleko, the young gipsy—“Where are you going, my handsome youth—lie still…” And then: “You’re all bespattered with blood! Oh, what have you done?…Nothing!” With what a cruel smile I kept repeating this “Nothing!” My father was not at home; but my mother, who had for some time past been in a state of almost continual wild exasperation, noticed my look of desperate determination and said to me at supper, “What are you sulking for, like a bear with a sore head?” I just smiled condescendingly to her in reply and thought, “If they only knew!” It struck eleven; I went to my room but did not undress; I was waiting for midnight; at last it struck. “Time I went!” I muttered through my teeth, and buttoned my coat up to the top, and even rolled up my sleeves. I went into the garden. I had already selected the spot from which to keep watch: at the end of the garden, where the fence separating our part of the grounds from the Zasyekins’ joined the common wall, grew a solitary pine tree. Standing under its low, thick branehes, I could see quite well, as far as the darkness of the night permitted, everything that went on round me; nearby ran a path which always seemed full of mystery to me; like a snake, it crept under the fence which, at that spot, bore the marks of climbing feet and led up to a round summer-house of thickly growing acacias. I made my way to the pine tree, leaned against its trunk, and began my watch. The night was still and quiet, like the night before; but there were fewer clouds in the sky, and the outlines of the bushes and even of tall flowers could be seen more clearly. The first moments of waiting were full of agonizing suspense and almost of terror. I was determined to stop at nothing; all I was uncertain of was what I had to do. Was I to thunder out, “Where are you going? Stop! Confess, or die!” Or should I simply strike? Every sound, every rustle and whisper, seemed extraordinarily significant…. I was getting ready…. I leaned forward…. But half an hour passed, an hour passed: my blood grew calmer, colder; the realization that I was doing it all for no reason, that I was even a little ridiculous, that Malevsky had pulled my leg began to dawn on me. I left my hiding place and walked all round the garden. As though on purpose, not the slightest noise could be heard; everything was at rest; even our dog was asleep, curled up by the gate. I climbed up on the ruins of the hot-house, saw the open countryside stretching far into the distance, recalled my meeting with Zinaida, and sank into a reverie…. I gave a start; I thought I heard the creak of an opening door, then the faint crack of a snapping twig. In two bounds I got down from the ruin and—stood rooted to the spot. I could clearly hear the sound of rapid, light, but cautious footsteps in the garden. They were coming towards me. “Here he is—here he is at last!” raced through my heart. I pulled the knife out of my pocket convulsively, opened it convulsively—red sparks whirled round before my eyes, my hair stood on end