continue..
but nothing came of it. Meanwhile it was getting near dinnertime. I went down into the valley; a narrow, sandy path wound its way through it towards the town. I walked along that path. The dull thud of horses’ hooves sounded behind me. I looked round, stopped involuntarily, and took off my cap: I saw my father and Zinaida. They were riding side by side. My father was saying something to her, bending right over her and leaning with his hand on the neck of his horse. He was smiling; Zinaida listened to him in silence, her eyes severely cast down and her lips tightly pressed together. At first I saw only them; a few moments later I caught sight of Belovzorov round a bend in the valley in his hussar’s uniform with a short cloak, on a foaming black horse. The gallant steed tossed its head, snorted, and pranced. The rider was holding him back and at the same time spurring him on. I stepped aside. My father gathered up the reins, moved away from Zinaida; she raised her eyes to him slowly and they galloped off. Belovzorov raced after them, his sabre rattling. “He’s as red as a lobster,” I thought, “while she…why is she so pale? Out riding the whole morning and—pale?” I redoubled my steps and got home just before dinner. My father was already sitting, washed and fresh and dressed for dinner, beside my mother’s chair, and was reading to her in his even and rich voice an article from Journal de Débats; but my mother listened to him without attention and when she saw me asked where I had been all day long, adding that she didn’t like it when people ran about goodness knows where and with whom. “But I have been taking a walk by myself,” I was about to reply, but I looked at my father and for some reason said nothing. During the next five or six days I scarcely saw Zinaida: she appeared to be unwell, which, however, did not prevent the usual visitors of the cottage from calling—in order, as they put it, to “keep watch by the patient’s bedside”—all except Maydanov, who immediately lost heart and looked bored whenever there was no chance for going into ecstasies. Belovzorov sat dejectedly in a corner, all buttoned up and red in the face; a kind of evil smile constantly hovered over Count Malevsky’s refined face. He really had fallen out of favour with Zinaida and was waiting with special zeal on the old princess, drove with her in a hired carriage to call on the Governor-General; this visit, however, turned out to be a failure, and Malevsky was even involved in some unpleasantness, for he was reminded of an unsavoury incident with some officers of a sapper regiment and in explaining it away he had to plead his inexperience at the time. Lushin used to come twice a day, but he did not stay long; I was a little frightened of him after our last talk, and yet at the same time I felt genuinely attracted to him. One day he went for a walk with me in the Neskoochny Park, was very amiable and friendly, told me the names and the properties of various herbs and flowers, and suddenly, as they say, “out of the blue,” cried, striking himself on the forehead, “And I, fool that I am, thought that she was a flirt. It seems some people find it sweet to sacrifice themselves.” “What do you mean by that?” I asked. “I don’t want to say anything to you,” Lushin replied brusquely. Zinaida avoided me: my presence—I could not help noticing it—made an unpleasant impression on her. She turned away from me involuntarily—involuntarily. It was that that was so bitter, so crushing, but I could do nothing about it. I did my best to keep out of her sight and merely watched her from a distance, which I did not always succeed in doing. As before, something I could not understand was happening to her: her face had changed; she was quite a different person. The change that had taken place in her struck me particularly one warm, quiet evening. I was sitting on a low seat under a spreading elder bush; I was very fond of that place, for from it I could see the window of Zinaida’s room. I sat there; in the dark foliage over my head a little bird was busily moving about; a grey cat, its back arched, was creeping stealthily into the garden, and the early beetles were droning heavily in the air which was still clear, though no longer bright. I sat there looking at her window and waiting to see whether it would open: it did open, and Zinaida appeared in it. She was wearing a white dress, and she was pale: her face, shoulders, and arms were pale, almost white. She stayed there a long time without moving and for a long time gazed straight before her from under her knitted brows. I had never seen her look like that. Then she clasped her hands tight, very tight, raised them to her lips, her forehead, and suddenly pulled her fingers apart and thrust her hair back from her ears, tossed it and nodded her head with an air of determination, and slammed the window to. Three days later she met me in the garden. I was about to turn away, but she stopped me herself. “Give me your hand,” she said to me in her old affectionate tone of voice. “It’s a long time since I’ve had a talk with you.” I looked at her: her eyes shone softly and her face was smiling as though through a haze. “Are you still not well?” I asked her. “No, that’s all over now,” she replied and picked a small red rose. “I’m a little tired, but that too will pass.” “And you’ll be the same as before?” I asked. Zinaida held the rose up to her face, and it seemed to me as if her cheeks had caught the reflection of its bright petals. “Why, have I changed?” she asked me. “Yes, you have,” I answered in a low voice. “I’ve been cold to you, I know,” began Zinaida, “but you shouldn’t have paid any attention to it. I’m afraid I couldn’t help it—but why talk about it?” “You don’t want me to love you, that’s what it is!” I exclaimed darkly, in an uncontrollable outburst. “No, do love me, but not as before.” “How then?” “Let us be friends—that’s how!” Zinaida said, giving me the rose to smell. “Listen,” she said, “you know I am much older than you, don’t you? I might be your aunt, mightn’t I? Well, perhaps not your aunt, but your elder sister. And you—” “And I am a child so far as you’re concerned,” I interrupted. “Well, yes, a child, but a sweet, good, clever child whom I love very much. Do you know what? I’m going to make you my page from today, and please don’t forget that pages should never be very far from their ladies. And here’s the token of your new dignity,” she added, sticking the rose in the buttonhole of my tunic, “a sign of our gracious favour.” “I used to get other favours from you before,” I murmured. “Oh!” Zinaida said, giving me a sidelong look. “What a memory he has. Oh, well, I’m just as ready now.” And bending over me, she imprinted a chaste, calm kiss on my forehead. I just looked at her, but she turned away and saying, “Follow me, my page,” went towards the cottage. I followed her, but still in a state of bewilderment. “Can this gentle sensible girl,” I could not help thinking, “be the Zinaida I used to know?” I thought that she walked more quietly now and that her whole figure was more stately and more graceful. And, good Lord, with what fresh force my love flared up in me! After dinner the visitors gathered again at the cottage—and the young princess came out to them. The entire company was there in full force, as on that first unforgettable evening. Even Nirmatsky dragged himself to the party to see her; this time Maydanov arrived before anyone else and brought a new poem with him. The game of forfeits began again, but this time without the strange pranks, without the horseplay and noise—the gipsy element had gone. Zinaida gave a new tone to our gathering. I sat beside her, as her page. Among other things, she proposed that anyone who had to pay a forfeit should tell his dream; but this was not a success. The dreams were either uninteresting (Belovzorov had dreamt that he fed carp to his mare and that she had a wooden head), or unnatural and made-up. Maydanov regaled us with a long, long story; there were sepulchres in it, angels with lyres, talking flowers,