continue..
italic alphabet by which m is derived from a, b, etc. there must correspond a process of derivation in the Greek alphabet by which µ is derived from α, β, etc. In such a case instead of reasoning with respect to the properties of one scheme in order to deduce equivalences, we may substitute the other scheme, or conversely; and then transpose at the end of the argument. This device of reasoning, which is almost universal in mathematics, we will call the method of substitutive schemes, or more briefly, the method of substitution. These substituted things belonging to another scheme are nothing else than substitutive signs. For in the use of substituted schemes we cease to think of the original scheme. The rule of reasoning is to confine thought to those properties, previously determined, which are shared in common with the original scheme, and to interpret the results from one set of things into the other at the end of the argument. An instance of this process of reasoning by substitution is to be found in the theory of quantity. Quantities are measured by their ratio to an arbitrarily assumed quantity of the same kind, called the unit. Any set of quantities of one kind can be represented by a corresponding set of quantities of any other kind merely in so far as their numerical ratios to their unit are concerned. For the representative set have only to bear the same ratios to their unit as do the original set to their unit. 6. Conventional Schemes. The use of a calculus of substitutive signs in reasoning can now be explained. Besides using substitutive schemes with naturally suitable properties, we may by convention assign to arbitrary marks laws of equivalence which are identical with the laws of equivalence of the originals about which we desire to reason. The set of marks may then be considered as a scheme of things with properties assigned by convention. The determining property of the scheme is that the marks are of certain assigned sorts arranged in certain types of sequence. The characteristics of the scheme are the conventional laws by which certain arrangements of the marks in sequence on paper are to be taken as equivalent. As long as the marks are treated as mutually determined by their conventional properties, reasoning concerning the marks will hold good concerning the originals for which the marks are substitutive signs. For instance in the employment of the marks x, y, +, the equation, x+y=y+x, asserts that a certain union on paper of x and y possesses the conventional quality that the order of x and y is indifferent. Therefore any union of two things with a result independent of any precedence of one thing before the other possesses so far properties identical with those of the union above set down between x and y. Not only can the reasoning be transferred from the originals to the substitutive signs, but the imaginative thought itself can in a large measure be avoided. For whereas combinations of the original things are possible only in thought and by an act of the imagination, the combinations of the conventional substitutive signs of a calculus are physically made on paper. The mind has simply to attend to the rules for transformation and to use its experience and imagination to suggest likely methods of procedure. The rest is merely physical actual interchange of the signs instead of thought about the originals. A calculus avoids the necessity of inference and replaces it by an external demonstration, where inference and external demonstration are to be taken in the senses assigned to them by F.H.Bradley. In this connection a demonstration is to be defined as a process of combining a complex of facts, the data, into a whole so that some new fact is evident. Inference is an ideal combination or construction within the mind of the reasoner which results in the intuitive evidence of a new fact or relation between the data. But in the use of a calculus this process of combination is externally performed by the combination of the concrete symbols, with the result of a new fact respecting the symbols which arises for sensuous perception. When this new fact is treated as a symbol carrying a meaning, it is found to mean the fact which would have been intuitively evident in the process of inference. 7. Uninterpretable Forms. The logical difficulty involved in the use of a calculus only partially interpretable can now be explained. The discussion of this great problem in its application to the special case of (−1) engaged the attention of the leading mathematicians of the first half of this century, and led to the development on the one hand of the Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable, and on the other hand of the science here called Universal Algebra. The difficulty is this: the symbol (−1) is absolutely without meaning when it is endeavoured to interpret it as a number; but algebraic transformations which involve the use of complex quantities of the form a+bi, where a and b are numbers and i stands for the above symbol, yield propositions which do relate purely to number. As a matter of fact the propositions thus discovered were found to be true propositions. The method therefore was trusted, before any explanation was forthcoming why algebraic reasoning which had no intelligible interpretation in arithmetic should give true arithmetical results. The difficulty was solved by observing that Algebra does not depend on Arithmetic for the validity of its laws of transformation. If there were such a dependence, it is obvious that as soon as algebraic expressions are arithmetically unintelligible all laws respecting them must lose their validity. But the laws of Algebra, though suggested by Arithmetic, do not depend on it. They depend entirely on the convention by which it is stated that certain modes of grouping the symbols are to be considered as identical. This assigns certain properties to the marks which form the symbols of Algebra. The laws regulating the manipulation of the algebraic symbols are identical with those of Arithmetic. It follows that no algebraic theorem can ever contradict any result which could be arrived at by Arithmetic; for the reasoning in both cases merely applies the same general laws to different classes of things. If an algebraic theorem is interpretable in Arithmetic, the corresponding arithmetical theorem is therefore true. In short when once Algebra is conceived as an independent science dealing with the relations of certain marks conditioned by the observance of certain conventional laws, the difficulty vanishes. If the laws be identical, the theorems of the one science can only give results conditioned by the laws which also hold good for the other science; and therefore these results, when interpretable, are true. It will be observed that the explanation of the legitimacy of the use of a partially interpretable calculus does not depend upon the fact that in another field of thought the calculus is entirely interpretable. The discovery of an interpretation undoubtedly gave the clue by means of which the true solution was arrived at. For the fact that the processes of the calculus were interpretable in a science so independent of Arithmetic as is Geometry at once showed that the laws of the calculus might have been defined in reference to geometrical processes. But it was a paradox to assert that a science like Algebra, which had been studied for centuries without reference to Geometry, was after all dependent upon Geometry for its first principles. The step to the true explanation was then easily taken. But the importance of the assistance given to the study of Algebra by the discovery of a complete interpretation of its processes cannot be over-estimated. It is natural to think of the substitutive set of things as assisting the study of the properties of the originals. Especially is this the case with a calculus of which the interest almost entirely depends upon its relation to the originals. But it must be remembered that conversely the originals give immense aid to the study of the substitutive things or symbols. The whole of Mathematics consists in the organization of a series of aids to the imagination in the process of reasoning; and for this purpose device is piled upon device. No sooner has a substitutive scheme been devised to assist in the investigation of any originals, than the imagination begins to use the originals to assist in the investigation of the substitutive scheme. In some connections it would be better to abandon the conception of originals studied by the aid of substitutive schemes, and to conceive of two sets of interrelated things studied together, each scheme exemplifying the operation of the same general laws. The discovery therefore of the geometrical representation of the algebraical complex quantity, though unessential to the logic of Algebra, has been quite essential to the modern developments of the science. The foregoing consists of Chapter I from Whitehead’s a treatise