continue..
sack; and if that shall prove to be so—and it undoubtedly will—this sack of gold belongs to a fellow citizen who will henceforth stand before the nation as the symbol of the special virtue which has made our town famous throughout the land—Mr. Billson!” The house had gotten itself all ready to burst into the proper tornado of applause; but instead of doing it, it seemed stricken with a paralysis; there was a deep hush for a moment or two, then a wave of whispered murmurs swept the place—of about this tenor: “Billson! oh, come, this is too thin! Twenty dollars to a stranger—or anybody—Billson! Tell it to the marines!” And now at this point the house caught its breath all of a sudden in a new access of astonishment, for it discovered that whereas in one part of the hall Deacon Billson was standing up with his head meekly bowed, in another part of it Lawyer Wilson was doing the same. There was a wondering silence now for a while. Everybody was puzzled, and nineteen couples were surprised and indignant. Billson and Wilson turned and stared at each other. Billson asked, bitingly: “Why do you rise, Mr. Wilson?” “Because I have a right to. Perhaps you will be good enough to explain to the house why you rise?” “With great pleasure. Because I wrote that paper.” “It is an impudent falsity! I wrote it myself.” It was Burgess’s turn to be paralyzed. He stood looking vacantly at first one of the men and then the other, and did not seem to know what to do. The house was stupefied. Lawyer Wilson spoke up, now, and said: “I ask the Chair to read the name signed to that paper.” That brought the Chair to itself, and it read out the name: “‘John Wharton Billson.’” “There!” shouted Billson. “What have you got to say for yourself, now? And what kind of apology are you going to make to me and to this insulted house for the imposture which you have attempted to play here?” “No apologies are due, sir; and as for the rest of it, I publicly charge you with pilfering my note from Mr. Burgess and substituting a copy of it signed with your own name. There is no other way by which you could have gotten hold of the test remark; I alone, of living men, possessed the secret of its wording.” There was likely to be a scandalous state of things if this went on; everybody noticed with distress that the shorthand scribes were scribbling like mad; many people were crying, “Chair, Chair! Order! Order!” Burgess rapped with his gavel, and said: “Let us not forget the proprieties due. There has evidently been a mistake somewhere, but surely that is all. If Mr. Wilson gave me an envelope —and I remember now that he did—I still have it.” He took one out of his pocket, opened it, glanced at it, looked surprised and worried, and stood silent a few moments. Then he waved his hand in a wandering and mechanical way, and made an effort or two to say something, then gave it up, despondently. Several voices cried out: “Read it! Read it! What is it?” So he began in a dazed and sleepwalker fashion: The remark which I made to the unhappy stranger was this: “You are far from being a bad man. (The house gazed at him, mareling.) Go, and reform.”’(Murmurs: “Amazing! what can this mean?”) This one,” said the Chair, “is signed Thurlow G.Wilson.” “There!” cried Wilson, “I reckon that settles it! I knew perfectly well my note was purloined.” “Purloined!” retorted Billson. “I’ll let you know that neither you nor any man of your kidney must venture to—” The Chair. “Order, gentlemen, order! Take your seats, both of you, please.” They obeyed, shaking their heads and grumbling angrily. The house was profoundly puzzled; it did not know what to do with this curious emergency. Presently Thompson got up. Thompson was the hatter. He would have liked to be a Nineteener; but such was not for him: his stock of hats was not considerable enough for the position. He said: “Mr. Chairman, if I may be permitted to make a suggestion, can both of of these gentlemen be right? I put it to you, sir, can both have happened to say the very same words to the stranger? It seems to me—” The tanner got up and interrupted him. The tanner was a disgruntled man; he believed himself entitled to be a Nineteener, but he couldn’t get recognition. It made him a little unpleasant in his ways and speech. Said he: “Sho, that’s not the point! That could happen—twice in a hundred years—but not the other thing. Neither of them gave the twenty dollars!” (A ripple of applause.) Billson. “I did!” Wilson. “I did!” Then each accused the other of pilfering. The Chair. “Order! Sit down, if you please—both of you. Neither of the notes has been out of my possession at any moment.” A Voice. “Good—that settles that!” The Tanner. “Mr. Chairman, one thing is now plain: one of these men has been eavesdropping under the other one’s bed, and filching family secrets. If it is not unparliamentary to suggest it, I will remark that both are equal to it. (The Chair. “Order! Order!”) I withdraw the remark, sir, and will confine myself to suggesting that if one of them has overheard the other reveal the test remark to his wife, we shall catch him now.” A Voice. “How?” The Tanner. “Easily. The two have not quoted the remark in exactly the same words. You would have noticed that, if there hadn’t been a considerable stretch of time and an exciting quarrel inserted between the two readings.” A Voice. “Name the difference.” The Tanner. “The word very is in Billson’s note, and not in the other.” Many Voices. “That’s so—he’s right!” The Tanner. “And so, if the Chair will examine the test remark in the sack, we shall know which of these two frauds—(The Chair. “Order!”)— which of these two adventurers—(The Chair. “Order! Order!")—which of these two gentlemen—(Laughter and applause)—is entitled to wear the belt as being the first dishonest blatherskite ever bred in this town— which he has dishonored, and which will be a sultry place for him from now out!” (Vigorous applause.) Many Voices. “Open it!—open the sack!” Mr. Burgess made a slit in the sack, slid his hand in and brought out an envelope. In it were a couple of folded notes. He said: “One of these is marked, ‘Not to be examined until all written communications which have been addressed to the Chair—if any—shall have been read.’ The other is marked ‘The Test.’ Allow me. It is worded—to wit: “‘I do not require that the first half of the remark which was made to me by my benefactor shall be quoted with exactness, for it was not striking, and could be forgotten; but its closing fifteen words are quite striking, and I think easily rememberable; unless these shall be accurately reproduced, let the applicant be regarded as an impostor. My benefactor began by saying he seldom gave advice to anyone, but that it always bore the hallmark of high value when he did give it. Then he said this— and it has never faded from my memory: “You are far from being a bad man—”’” Fifty Voices. “That settles it—the money’s Wilson’s! Wilson! Wilson! Speech! Speech!” People jumped up and crowded around Wilson, wringing his hand and congratulating fervently—meantime the Chair was hammering with the gavel and shouting: “Order, gentlemen! Order! Order! Let me finish reading, please.” When quiet was restored, the reading was resumed, as follows: “‘Go, and reform—or, mark my words—some day, for your sins, you will die and go to hell or Hadleyburg—try and make it the former.’” A ghastly silence followed. First an angry cloud began to settle darkly upon the faces of the citizenship; after a pause the cloud began to rise, and a tickled expression tried to take its place; tried so hard that it was only kept under with great and painful difficulty; the reporters, the Brixtonites, and other strangers bent their heads down and shielded their faces with their hands, and managed to hold in by main strength and heroic courtesy. At this most inopportune time burst upon the stillness the roar of a solitary voice—Jack Halliday’s: “That’s got the hallmark on it!” Then the house let go, strangers and all. Even Mr. Burgess’ gravity broke down presently; then the audience considered itself officially absolved from all restraint, and it made the most of its privilege. It was a good long laugh, and a tempestuously wholehearted one, but it ceased at last—long enough for Mr. Burgess to try to resume, and for the people to get their eyes partially wiped; then it broke out again; and afterward yet again; then at last Burgess was able to get out these serious words: