Work: Micromégas Field: micromegas Author: Voltaire Title: Conversation with the Men “O intelligent atoms in whom the Eternal Being has been pleased to manifest His dexterity and His might, the joys you taste on your globe are doubtless very pure, for as you are so immaterial, and seem to be all spirit, your lives must be passed in Love and in Thought: that, indeed, is the true life of spirits. Nowhere yet have I found real happiness, but that you have it here I cannot doubt.” At these words all the philosophers shook their heads and one of them, more frank than the rest, candidly admitted that, apart from a small number of people who were little esteemed, the rest of the inhabitants of the world were a crowd of madmen, miscreants, and unfortunates. “If evil be a property of matter,” he said, “we have more matter than is necessary for the doing of much evil, and too much spirit if evil be a property of the spirit. Do you realize, for instance, that at this moment there are a hundred thousand madmen of our species wearing hats killing, or being killed by, a hundred thousand other animals wearing turbans, and that over almost all the face of the earth this has been the custom from time immemorial?” The Sirian shuddered and asked what could be the ground for these horrible quarrels between such puny beasts. “The matter at issue,” replied the philosopher, “is some mud heap as large as your heel. It is not that any single man of all these millions who slaughter each other claims one straw on the mud heap. The point is— shall the mud heap belong to a certain man called ‘Sultan’ or to another called, I know not why, ‘Caesar’? Neither of them has ever seen or will ever see the little bit of land in dispute, and barely one of these animals which slaughter each other has ever seen the animal for which he is slaughtered.” “Wretch!” cried the Sirian indignantly. “Such a riot of mad fury is inconceivable! I am tempted to take three steps and with three blows of my foot to crush out of existence this anthill of absurd cutthroats.” “Do not trouble,” answered the philosopher; “they wreak their own ruin. Know that after ten years not a hundredth part of these miscreants is ever left. Know that, even when they have not drawn the sword, hunger, exhaustion, or debauchery carries them nearly all off. Besides, it is not they who should be punished, but the stay-at-home barbarians who, after a good meal, order from their remote closets the massacre of a million men, and then have solemn prayers of gratitude for the event offered up to God.” The traveler was stirred with pity for the little human race, in which he discovered such amazing contrasts. “Since you are of the small number of the wise,” he said to these gentlemen, “and that apparently you do not kill people for money, tell me, I pray, how you employ yourselves.” “We dissect flies,” answered the philosopher, “we measure lines, we gather mathematical data. We agree on the two or three points we understand, and we argue about the two or three thousand we do not.” Immediately a fancy took the Sirian and the Saturnian to question these thinking atoms in order to find out on what things they were agreed. “What do you reckon to be the distance,” asked the latter, “between the Dog-star and Gemini?” “Thirty-two and a half degrees,” they all replied in concert. “And from here to the moon?” “In round numbers, sixty times the radius of the earth.” “What does your air weigh?” he continued, thinking to catch them. He did not succeed, however, for they all told him that the air weighs about nine hundred times less than an equal volume of the lightest water, and nineteen thousand times less than ducat gold. The little dwarf from Saturn, astounded at their replies, was tempted to take for sorcerers these same people to whom a quarter of an hour before he had refused a soul. Finally, Micromégas put in a word. “Since you are so well acquainted with what is outside you,” he said, “you doubtless know still better what is inside. Tell me what your soul is, and how you form your ideas.” As before, the philosophers replied in concert—but each held a different opinion. The oldest quoted Aristotle, another pronounced the name of Descartes, a third the name of Malebranche, a fourth that of Leibnitz, a fifth that of Locke. An aged Peripatetic said loudly and confidently: “‘The soul is an entelechy and a proof of its power to be what it is.’ That is what Aristotle states expressly, page 653 of the Louvre edition. Entelechia esti [It is an entelechy; i.e., the final stage in development from potentiality to actuality.], etc.” “I do not understand Greek too well,” remarked the giant. “No more do I,” said the philosophical maggot. “Why then,” asked the Sirian, “do you quote Aristotle in Greek?” “Because,” replied the scholar, “one should always quote what one does not comprehend at all in the language one understands least.” It was the Cartesian’s turn. “The soul,” he said, “is a pure spirit which has received in its mother’s womb all metaphysical ideas and which, on leaving it, has to go to school to learn over again what it knew so well, and will never know again.” “It was not worth while,” observed the animal eight leagues long, “for your soul to be so wise in your mother’s womb if it had to become so ignorant by the time your chin could grow a beard. But what do you mean by a spirit?” “What a question!” said the man of abstractions. “I have not the remotest idea. A spirit, it is said, is not matter.” “But do you know at least what matter is?” “Very well,” replied the man. “For example, this stone is gray, has a certain shape and three dimensions, is heavy and divisible.” “Well,” said the Sirian, “this thing which appears to you to be divisible, heavy and gray, will you kindly tell me what it is? You perceive some of its attributes, but do you know what it is fundamentally?” “No,” answered the other. “Then you do not know at all what matter is.” Mr. Micromégas then asked another of the wise men he held on his thumb what his soul was, and what it did. “Nothing at all,” replied the disciple of Malebranche. “God does everything for me. I see everything in Him, I do everything in Him. It is He who does everything without my interfering.” “It would be as well worth while not to exist,” said the sage from Sirius. “And you, my friend,” he continued to a Leibnitzian who was there, “what is your soul?” “My soul,” answered the Leibnitzian, “is a hand which points the hours while my body ticks: or, if you prefer it, it is my soul which ticks while my body points the hour: or again, my soul is the mirror of the universe, and my body is the frame of the mirror. That is quite clear.” A humble partisan of Locke stood nearby, and when he was spoken to at last, replied: “I do not know how I think, but I do know that I have never thought save by virtue of my senses. That there are immaterial and intelligent beings I do not doubt: but that it is impossible for God to endow matter with mind I doubt very much. I hold the power of God in veneration: I am not free to set bounds to it: I predicate nothing: I am content to believe that more things are possible than we think.” The animal from Sirius smiled. He did not think the last speaker the least wise. The dwarf from Saturn would have embraced the follower of Locke had it not been for the difference in their proportions. But, unluckily, there was present a minute animalcule in a clerical hat who interrupted the other animalcule philosophers. He said he understood the whole mystery; that the explanation was to be found in the Summa of St. Thomas. He looked the two celestial inhabitants up and down, and asserted that their persons, worlds, suns, and stars were created solely for man. At this speech the two travelers fell on top of each other, suffocating with that inextinguishable laughter which, according to Homer, is the lot of the gods. Their shoulders and stomachs heaved, and amid these convulsions the ship which the Sirian held on his thumb fell into one of the Saturnian’s trousers pockets. These two good people tried to find it for a long time and, having recovered it at last, set everything very nicely in order. The Sirian picked the maggots up again and spoke to them once more with much kindness, although at the bottom of