Work: What Men Live By Field: what men live by Author: Leo Tolstoy I John, III, 14. We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not abideth in death. I John, III, 17–18. But whoso hath the world’s goods, and beholdeth his brother in need, and shutteth up his compassion from him, how doth the love of God abide in him? My little children, let us not love in word, neither with the tongue, but in deed and truth. I John, IV, 7–8. Love is of God; and every one that loveth is begotten of God and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. I John, IV, 12. No man hath beheld God at any time: if we love one another, God abideth in us. I John, IV, 16. God is love; and he that abideth in love abideth in God, and God abideth in him. I John, IV, 20. If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar; for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen cannot love God whom he hath not seen. A cobbler and his wife and children had lodgings with a peasant. He owned neither house nor land, and he supported himself and his family by shoemaking. Bread was dear and labor was poorly paid, and whatever he earned went for food. The cobbler and his wife had one shuba between them, and this had come to tatters, and for two years the cobbler had been hoarding in order to buy sheepskins for a new shuba. When autumn came, the cobbler’s hoard had grown; three paper rubles lay in his wife’s box, and five rubles and twenty kopecks more were due the cobbler from his customers. One morning the cobbler betook himself to the village to get his new shuba. He put on his wife’s wadded nankeen jacket over his shirt, and outside of all a woolen caftan. He put the three-ruble note in his pocket, broke off a staff, and after breakfast he set forth. He said to himself: “I will get my five rubles from the peasant, and that with these three will buy pelts for my shuba.” The cobbler reached the village and went to one peasant’s; he was not at home, but his wife promised to send her husband with the money the next week, but she could not give him any money. He went to another, and this peasant swore that he had no money at all; but he paid him twenty kopecks for cobbling his boots. The cobbler made up his mind to get the pelts on credit. But the fur dealer refused to sell on credit. “Bring the money,” said he; “then you can make your choice; but we know how hard it is to get what is one’s due.” And so the cobbler did not do his errand, but he had the twenty kopecks for cobbling the boots, and he took from a peasant an old pair of felt boots to mend with leather. At first the cobbler was vexed at heart; then he spent the twenty kopecks for vodka, and started to go home. In the morning he had felt cold, but after having drunk the brandy he was warm enough even without the shuba. The cobbler was walking along the road, striking the frozen ground with the staff which he had in one hand, and swinging the felt boots in the other, and thus he talked to himself: “I am warm even without a shuba,” said he. “I drank a glass, and it dances through all my veins. And so I don’t need a sheepskin coat. I walk along, and all my vexation is forgotten. What a fine fellow I am! What do I need? I can get along without the shuba. I don’t need it at all. There’s one thing: the wife will feel bad. Indeed, it is too bad; here I have been working for it, and now to have missed it! You just wait now! if you don’t bring the money, I will take your hat, I vow I will! What a way of doing things! He pays me twenty kopecks at a time! Now what can you do with twenty kopecks? Get a drink; that’s all! You say, ‘I am poor!’ But if you are poor, how is it with me? You have a house and cattle and everything; I have nothing but my own hands. You raise your own grain, but I have to buy mine, when I can, and it costs me three rubles a week for food alone. When I get home now, we shall be out of bread. Another ruble and a half of outgo! So you must give me what you owe me.” By this time the cobbler had reached the chapel at the crossroads, and he saw something white behind the chapel. It was already twilight, and the cobbler strained his eyes, but he could not make out what the object was. “There never was any such stone there,” he said to himself. “A cow? But it does not look like a cow! The head is like a man’s; but what is that white? And why should there be any man there?” He went nearer. Now he could see plainly. What a strange thing! It was indeed a man, but was he alive or dead? sitting there stark naked, leaning against the chapel, and not moving. The cobbler was frightened. He said to himself: “Some one has killed that man, stripped him, and flung him down there. If I go near, I may get into trouble.” And the cobbler hurried by. In passing the chapel he could no longer see the man; but after he was fairly beyond it, he looked back, and saw that the man was no longer leaning against the chapel, but was moving, and apparently looking after him. The cobbler was still more scared by this, and he said to himself: “Shall I go back to him or go on? If I go back to him, there might something unpleasant happen; who knows what sort of a man he is? He can’t have gone there for any good purpose. If I went to him, he might spring on me and choke me, and I could not get away from him; and even if he did not choke me, why should I try to make his acquaintance? What could be done with him, naked as he is? I can’t take him with me, and give him my own clothes! That would be absurd.” And the cobbler hastened his steps. He had already gone some distance beyond the chapel, when his conscience began to prick him. He stopped short. “What is this that you are doing, Semyon?” he asked himself. “A man is perishing of cold, and you are frightened, and hurry by! Are you so very rich? Are you afraid of losing your money? Aï, Sema! That is not right!” Semyon turned and went back to the man. Semyon went back to the man, looked at him, and saw that it was a young man in the prime of life; there were no bruises visible on him, but he was evidently freezing and afraid; he was sitting there, leaning back, and he did not look at Semyon; apparently he was so weak that he could not lift his eyes. Semyon went up close to him, and suddenly the man seemed to revive; he lifted his head and fastened his eyes on Semyon. And by this glance the man won Semyon’s heart. He threw the felt boots down on the ground, took off his belt and laid it on the boots, and pulled off his caftan. “There’s nothing to be said,” he exclaimed. “Put these on! There now!” Semyon put his hand under the man’s elbow, to help him, and tried to lift him. The man got up. And Semyon saw that his body was graceful and clean, that his hands and feet were comely, and that his face was agreeable. Semyon threw the caftan over his shoulders. He could not get his arms into the sleeves. Semyon found the place for him, pulled the coat up, wrapped it around him, and fastened the belt. He took off his tattered cap, and was going to give it to the stanger, but his head felt cold, and he said to himself: “The whole top of my head is bald, but he has long curly hair.” So he put his hat on again. “I had better let him put on my boots.” He made him sit down and put the felt boots on him. After the cobbler had thus dressed him, he says: “There now, brother, just stir about, and you will get warmed up. All these things are in other hands than ours. Can you walk?” The man