Work: “The Philosophy of Common Sense” fromPhilosophical Dictionary Field: philosophy of common sense Author: Voltaire Title: SELF-LOVE Nicole in his Essais de Morale—written on top of two or three thousand other volumes of ethics—says that “by means of the wheels and gibbets which people erect in common, the tyrannous thoughts and designs of each individual’s self-love are repressed.” I shall not inquire whether or not people have gibbets in common, as they have meadows and woods in common, and a common purse, or if one represses ideas with wheels; but it seems very strange to me that Nicole should take highway robbery and assassination for self-love. One should distinguish shades of difference a little better. The man who said that Nero had his mother assassinated through self-love, and that Cartouche had an excess of self-love, would not be expressing himself very correctly. Self-love is not wickedness, it is a sentiment that is natural to all men; it is much nearer vanity than crime. A beggar in the suburbs of Madrid was nobly begging charity. A passer-by said to him: “Are you not ashamed to practice this infamous calling when you are able to work?” “Sir,” answered the beggar, “I ask for money, not advice.” And he turned on his heel with full Castilian dignity. This gentleman was a proud beggar, his vanity was wounded by a trifle. He asked charity out of love for himself, and could not tolerate the reprimand out of further love for himself. A missionary traveling in India met a fakir laden with chains, naked as a monkey, lying on his stomach, who was having himself whipped for the sins of his compatriots, the Indians, who gave him a few farthings. “What self-denial!” said one of the spectators. “Self-denial!” answered the fakir. “I have myself flogged in this world in order to give this flogging back to you in the next world, when you will be horses and I a horseman.” Those who have said that love of ourselves is the basis of all our opinions and all our actions, have therefore been quite right in India, Spain, and all the habitable world: and as one does not write to prove to men that they have faces, it is not necessary to prove to them that they have self-love. Self-love is our instrument of preservation; it resembles the instrument which perpetuates the species. It is necessary, it is dear to us, it gives us pleasure, and it has to be hidden.