continue..
to assume this distinction as the basis of mathematical reasoning. Thus from another point of view all things which for any purpose can be conceived as equivalent form the extension (in the logical sense) of some universal conception. And conversely the collection of objects which together form the extension of some universal conception can for some purpose be treated as equivalent. So b=b′ can be interpreted as symbolizing the fact that the two individual things b and b′ are two individual cases of the same general conception B. For instance if b stand for 2+3 and b′ for 3+2, both b and b′ are individual instances of the general conception of a group of five things. The sign = as used in a calculus must be discriminated from the logical copula “is.” Two things b and b′ are connected in a calculus by the sign =, so that b=b′, when both b and b′ possess the attribute B. But we may not translate this into the standard logical form, b is b′. On the contrary, we say, b is B, and b′ is B; and we may not translate these standard forms of formal logic into the symbolic form, b=B, b′=B; at least we may not do so, if the sign = is to have the meaning which is assigned to it in a calculus. It is to be observed that the proposition asserted by the equation, b=b′, consists of two elements; which for the sake of distinctness we will name, and will call respectively the “truism” and the “paradox.” The truism is the partial identity of both b and b′, their common B-ness. The paradox is the distinction between b and b′, so that b is one thing and b′ is another thing: and these things, as being different, must have in some relation diverse properties. In assertions of equivalence as contained in a calculus the truism is passed over with the slightest possible attention, the main stress being laid on the paradox. Thus in the equation 2+3=3+2, the fact that both sides represent a common five-ness of number is not even mentioned explicitly. The sole direct statement is that the two different things 3+2 and 2+3 are in point of number equivalent. The reason for this unequal distribution of attention is easy to understand. In order to discover new propositions asserting equivalence it is requisite to discover easy marks or tests of equivalent things. These tests are discovered by a careful discussion of the truism, of the common B-ness of b and b′. But when once such tests have been elaborated, we may drop all thought of the essential nature of the attribute B, and simply apply the superficial test to b and b′ in order to verify b=b′. Thus in order to verify that thirty-seven times fifty-six is equal to fifty-six times thirty-seven, we may use the entirely superficial test applicable to this case that the same factors are mentioned as multiplied, though in different order. This discussion leads us at once to comprehend the essence of a calculus of substitutive signs. The signs are by convention to be considered equivalent when certain conditions hold. And these conditions when interpreted imply the fulfilment of the tests of equivalence. Thus in the discussion of the laws of a calculus stress is laid on the truism, in the development of the consequences on the paradox. 4. Operations. Judgments of equivalence can be founded on direct perception, as when it is judged by direct perception that two different pieces of stuff match in colour. But the judgment may be founded on a knowledge of the respective derivations of the things judged to be equivalent from other things respectively either identical or equivalent. It is this process of derivation which is the special province of a calculus. The derivation of a thing p from things a, b, c,…, can also be conceived as an operation on the things a, b, c,…, which produces the thing p. The idea of derivation includes that of a series of phenomenal occurrences. Thus two pieces of stuff may be judged to match in colour because they were dyed in the same dipping, or were cut from the same piece of stuff. But the idea is more general than that of phenomenal sequence of events: it includes purely logical activities of the mind, as when it is judged that an aggregate of five things has been presented to the mind by two aggregates of three things and of two things respectively. Another example of derivation is that of two propositions a and b which are both derived by strict deductive reasoning from the same propositions c, d, and e. The two propositions are either both proved or both unproved according as c, d, and e are granted or disputed. Thus a and b are so far equivalent. In other words a and b may be considered as the equivalent results of two operations on c, d and e. The words operation, combination, derivation, and synthesis will be used to express the same general idea, of which each word suggests a somewhat specialized form. This general idea may be defined thus: A thing a will be said to result from an operation on other things, c, d, e, etc., when a is presented to the mind as the result of the presentations of c, d and e, etc. under certain conditions; and these conditions are phenomenal events or mental activities which it is convenient to separate in idea into a group by themselves and to consider as defining the nature of the operation which is performed on c, d, e, etc. Furthermore the fact that c, d, e, etc. are capable of undergoing a certain operation involving them all will be considered as constituting a relation between c, d, e, etc. Also the fact that c is capable of undergoing an operation of a certain general kind will be considered as a property of c. Any additional specialization of the kind of operation or of the nature of the result will be considered as a mode of that property. 5. Substitutive Schemes. Let a, a′, etc., b, b′, etc., ……z, z′, etc., denote any set of objects considered in relation to some common property which is symbolized by the use of the italic alphabet of letters. The common property may not be possessed in the same mode by different members of the set. Their equivalence, or identity in relation to this property, is symbolized by a literal identity. Thus the fact that the things a and m′ are both symbolized by letters from the italic alphabet is here a sign that the things have some property in common, and the fact that the letters a and m′ are different letters is a sign that the two things possess this common property in different modes. On the other hand the two things a and a′ possess the common property in the same mode, and as far as this property is concerned they are equivalent. Let the sign = express equivalence in relation to this property, then a=a′, and m=m′. Let a set of things such as that described above, considered in relation to their possession of a common property in equivalent or in non-equivalent modes, be called a scheme of things; and let the common property of which the possession by any object marks that object as belonging to the scheme be called the determining property of the scheme. Thus objects belonging to the same scheme are equivalent if they possess the determining property in the same mode. Now relations must exist between non-equivalent things of the scheme which depend on the differences between the modes in which they possess the determining property of the scheme. In consequence of these relations from things a, b, c, etc. of the scheme another thing m of the scheme can be derived by certain operations. The equivalence, m=m′, will exist between m and m′, if m and m′ are derived from other things of the scheme by operations which only differ in certain assigned modes. The modes in which processes of derivation of equivalent things m and m′ from other things of the scheme can differ without destroying the equivalence of m and m′ will be called the characteristics of the scheme. Now it may happen that two schemes of things—with of course different determining properties—have the same characteristics. Also it may be possible to establish an unambiguous correspondence between the things of the two schemes, so that if a, a′, b, etc., belong to one scheme and α, α′, β, etc., belong to the other, then a corresponds to α, a′ to α′, b to β and so on. The essential rule of the correspondence is that if in one scheme two things, say a and a′, are equivalent, then in the other scheme their corresponding things α and α′ are equivalent. Accordingly to any process of derivation in the