continue..
a body when immersed in water is pressed upwards by the surrounding water with a resultant force equal to the weight of the water it displaces. This law can be proved theoretically from the mathematical principles of hydrostatics and can also be verified experimentally. Hence, if W lb. be the weight of the crown, as weighed in air, and w lb. be the weight of the water which it displaces when completely immersed, W−w would be the extra upward force necessary to sustain the crown as it hung in water. Title: Now, this upward force can easily be ascertained by weighing the body as it hangs in water, as shown in Fig. 3. If the weights in the right-hand scale come to F lb., then the apparent weight of the crown in water is F lb.; and we thus have where W and F are determined by the easy, and fairly precise, operation of weighing. Hence, by equation (A), is known. But is the ratio of the weight of the crown to the weight of an equal volume of water. This ratio is the same for any lump of metal of the same material: it is now called the specific gravity of the material, and depends only on the intrinsic nature of the substance and not on its shape or quantity. Thus to test if the crown were of gold, Archimedes had only to take a lump of indisputably pure gold and find its specific gravity by the same process. If the two specific gravities agreed, the crown was pure; if they disagreed, it was debased. This argument has been given at length, because not only is it the first precise example of the application of mathematical ideas to physics, but also because it is a perfect and simple example of what must be the method and spirit of the science for all time. The death of Archimedes by the hands of a Roman soldier is symbolical of a world change of the first magnitude: the theoretical Greeks, with their love of abstract science, were superseded in the leadership of the European world by the practical Romans. Lord Beaconsfield, in one of his novels, has defined a practical man as a man who practises the errors of his forefathers. The Romans were a great race, but they were cursed with the sterility which waits upon practicality. They did not improve upon the knowledge of their forefathers, and all their advances were confined to the minor technical details of engineering. They were not dreamers enough to arrive at new points of view, which could give a more fundamental control over the forces of nature. No Roman lost his life because he was absorbed in the contemplation of a mathematical diagram. The foregoing consists of Chapters I–III from Whitehead’s an introduction to mathematics .