continue..
she added, turning to me and pointing to each one of her guests in turn, “are Count Malevsky, Dr. Lushin, the poet Maydanov, retired Captain Nirmatsky, and Belovzorov, the hussar, whom you have met already. I hope you will all be good friends.” I was so overcome with confusion that I did not even bow to anyone; in Dr. Lushin I recognized the same dark man who had put me to shame so mercilessly in the garden; the others I did not know. “Count,” Zinaida went on, “write out a ticket for M’sieu Woldemar.” “That’s not fair,” the count replied with a slight Polish accent. “He did not play forfeits with us.” The count was a very handsome and fashionably dressed, dark-haired young man with expressive brown eyes, a small, narrow white nose, and a thin moustache above a tiny mouth. “It’s not fair,” repeated Belovzorov and the gentleman who had been introduced as a retired captain, a man in his forties, hideously pockmarked, with frizzy hair like a Negro’s, bandy-legged, and dressed in a military coat without epaulettes, which he wore unbuttoned. “Write out the ticket, I tell you,” repeated the princess. “What is this? A mutiny? M’sieu Woldemar is here for the first time, and today the rules do not apply to him. Don’t grumble, and write it out! That is my wish.” The count shrugged his shoulders, but, bowing his head obediently, picked up a pen in his white, beringed fingers, tore off a scrap of paper, and began writing on it. “Let me at least explain to M’sieu Woldemar what this is all about,” began Lushin in a sarcastic voice, “or else he’ll be completely at a loss. You see, young man, we are playing a game of forfeits. The princess has to pay a forfeit, and he who draws the lucky ticket will have the right to kiss her hand. Do you understand what I have told you?” I just glanced at him and continued to stand like one in a trance, while the young princess again jumped on a chair and once more began shaking the hat. They all moved up to her, and I with the rest. “Maydanov,” said the princess to the tall young man with a thin face, short-sighted little eyes, and extremely long black hair, “you, as a poet, ought to be magnanimous and give up your ticket to M’sieu Woldemar so that he may have two chances instead of one.” But Maydanov shook his head and tossed back his hair. I put my hand into the hat after all the others and unfolded my ticket. Good Lord, what did I feel when I saw on it the word kiss! “Kiss!” I cried involuntarily. “Bravo, he won!” the young princess cried. “I am so glad!” She got off the chair, looked into my eyes, and gave me such a bright and sweet look that my heart turned over within me. “Are you glad?” she asked me. “Me?” I murmured. “Sell me your ticket,” Belovzorov suddenly blurted out in my ear. “I’ll give you a hundred roubles.” I answered the hussar with so indignant a look that Zinaida clapped her hands, while Lushin cried, “Stout fellow! But,” he added, “as master of ceremonies, I am obliged to see that all the rules are kept. M’sieu Woldemar, go down on one knee! That’s our rule.” Zinaida stood in front of me with her head a little on one side, as though she wished to get a better look at me, and held out her hand to me with an air of great solemnity. Everything went black before my eyes; I was about to go down on one knee, but sank on both and touched Zinaida’s fingers so awkwardly with my lips that I scratched the tip of my nose on her nail. “Splendid!” cried Lushin, and helped me to get up. The game of forfeits went on. Zinaida made me sit down beside her. The forfeits she thought of! She had, among other things, to represent a statue, and she chose the hideous Nirmatsky as her pedestal, told him to lie down on the floor and to lower his head to his chest. The laughter never ceased for a moment. All this noise and uproar, all this unceremonious, almost riotous gaiety, all this strange relationship with unknown persons, simply went to my head, for I had been brought up soberly, in the seclusion of a staid country house. I was intoxicated, as though with wine. I began laughing at the top of my voice and talking a lot of nonsense more loudly than the others, so that even the old princess, who was sitting in the next room with some pettifogging lawyer’s clerk from the Iversky Gate, who had been invited for a consultation, came out to have a look at me. But I felt so intensely happy that I did not care for anyone’s sarcastic remarks or anyone’s disapproving looks. Zinaida continued to show a preference for me, and would not let me leave her side. For one forfeit I had to sit beside her, both of us covered with the same silk kerchief: I had to tell her my secret. I remember how both our heads were suddenly plunged in a close, semi-transparent, fragrant darkness and how near and how softly her eyes shone in this darkness, and I remember the burning breath of her parted lips and the glint of her teeth and how her hair tickled and scorched me. I was silent. She smiled mysteriously and slyly and at last whispered to me, “Well, what is it?” but I only blushed and laughed and turned away, hardly able to breathe. We got tired of forfeits and began playing a game with string. Heavens, how delighted I was when, in a moment of absentmindedness, I received a sharp and painful blow on my fingers and how I afterwards purposely tried to pretend that I was not paying attention and she teased me and refused to touch the hands that I held out to her! The things we did that evening! We played the piano, we sang and danced, and we acted a gipsy encampment. Nirmatsky was dressed up as a bear and made to drink salt water. Count Malevsky showed us all sorts of card tricks and finished up by shuffling the cards and dealing himself all the trumps at whist, upon which Lushin “had the honour” to congratulate him. Maydanov recited passages from his poem “The Murderer” (all this took place at a time when the romantic movement was at its height), which he intended to publish in a black cover with the title printed in blood-red letters; we stole the lawyer’s clerk’s cap off his knee and made him dance a Cossack dance by way of ransom; we dressed up old Vonifaty in a bonnet, and the young princess put on a man’s hat… It is impossible to enumerate everything we did that evening. Belovzorov alone skulked in a corner, looking cross and frowning. Sometimes his eyes would become bloodshot, he flushed all over, and it seemed as though he would at any moment hurl himself upon us all and scatter us in all directions; but the young princess would glance at him, shake her finger, and he would once more slink back to his corner. We were quite worn out at last. Even the old princess, who, as she expressed it, could “put up with anything”—no amount of noise seemed to trouble her—felt tired and declared that she would like to have a little rest. At midnight, supper was served. It consisted of a piece of stale, dry cheese and some cold ham patties which seemed more delicious to me than any pies; there was only one bottle of wine, and that too was a rather strange one: a dark-coloured bottle with a blown-out neck, and the wine in it smelt of pink paint: however, no one drank it. Tired and exhausted with happiness, I left the cottage: at parting, Zinaida pressed my hand warmly and again smiled enigmatically. The night air was heavy and damp against my burning face. A storm seemed to be gathering. Black clouds grew and crept across the sky, changing their smoky outlines even while one looked at them. The breeze quivered restlessly in the dark trees, and somewhere far beyond the horizon thunder was growing angrily and hollowly, as though to itself. I made my way to my room by the back door. The old man-servant who looked after me was asleep on the floor, and I had to step over him; he woke up, saw me, and told me that my mother had again been angry with me and had again wanted to send for me, but that my father would not let her. (I never went to bed without saying good night to my mother and asking her blessing.) However, there was nothing to be done about it