continue..
shiver, but something like a hardly perceptible breath, like a sensation of someone’s presence. I looked down. Below, on the road, in a light grey dress with a pink parasol on her shoulder, Zinaida was walking rapidly. She saw me, stopped, and turning back the brim of her straw hat, raised her velvety eyes to me. “What are you doing up there at such a height?” she asked me with a strange sort of smile. “Now,” she went on, “you keep telling me that you love me. Jump down into the road to me, if you really love me.” Zinaida had scarcely uttered those words when I was falling headlong towards her just as though someone had pushed me from behind. The wall was about fifteen feet high. I reached the ground on my feet, but the impact was so strong that I could not keep my balance. I fell down and for a moment lost consciousness. When I came to, I felt, without opening my eyes, Zinaida beside me. “My sweet boy,” she was saying, bending over me, and there was a note of alarmed tenderness in her voice, “how could you do it? How could you listen to me—you know I love you. Please get up.” Her bosom rose and fell close to me; her hands were touching my head; and suddenly—oh, what became of me then?—her soft fresh lips began to cover my face with kisses—they touched my lips—but at that moment, Zinaida probably guessed from the expression on my face that I had regained consciousness, though I still did not open my eyes, and, rising quickly, she said, “Well, get up, you naughty boy, you crazy young lunatic. Why are you lying in the dust?” I got up. “Give me my parasol,” said Zinaida. “See where I have thrown it! And don’t stare at me like that! Really! You’re not hurt, are you? Stung by the nettles, I expect. I tell you, don’t keep staring at me…. Why, he doesn’t understand a word, he doesn’t answer,” she added, as though to herself. “Go home, M’sieu Woldemar, and brush yourself, and don’t you dare follow me, or I shall be angry and will never again—” She did not finish the sentence and walked rapidly away, while I sat down by the side of the road. My legs would not support me. My arms throbbed from the stings of the nettles, my back ached, my head swam, but the feeling of bliss I experienced at that moment I never again felt in my life. It spread like a sweet pain through all my limbs and resolved itself at last in rapturous leaps and shouts. Yes, indeed, I was still a child. I was so gay and proud all that day, I retained so vividly the sensation of Zinaida’s kisses on my face, I recalled her every word with such a shudder of delight, I cherished my unexpected happiness so much, that I felt absolutely terrified, and did not even want to see her who was the cause of all these new sensations. It seemed to me that I had no right to demand anything more of fate, that all I had to do now was “go, take a deep breath for the last time, and die.” Yet the next day, on my way to the cottage, I felt greatly embarrassed and I tried in vain to conceal my embarrassment by assuming a modestly nonchalant air, such as is proper for a man who wishes to convey that he knows how to keep a secret. Zinaida received me very simply, without betraying any emotion. She merely shook a finger at me and asked whether I had any bruises on my body. All my modest nonchalance and air of mystery vanished instantly, and with them my embarrassment. Of course I had never expected anything in particular, but Zinaida’s composure made me feel as though someone had poured cold water over me: I realized that I was a child in her eyes—and I felt very unhappy! Zinaida walked up and down the room, giving me a quick smile every time she glanced at me; but her thoughts were far away—I saw that clearly enough. “Shall I speak to her about what happened yesterday,” I thought, “and ask her where she was going in such a hurry and find out once and for all?” But I just dismissed it all as hopeless and sat down quietly in a corner. Belovzorov came in; I was glad to see him. “I couldn’t find you a quiet horse,” he said in a hard voice. “Freitag says he can answer for one, but I’m not so sure. I am afraid.” “What are you afraid of, may I ask?” asked Zinaida. “What am I afraid of? Why, you don’t know how to ride. Goodness knows what might happen! And what a fantastic idea has come into your head suddenly!” “Well, that’s my affair, my dear wild beast. In that case, I’ll ask Peter.” (My father’s name was Peter, and I was surprised that she mentioned his name in so free and easy a manner, just as though she were sure of his readiness to do her a service.) “I see,” replied Belovzorov, “so it’s with him you mean to go out riding.” “With him or someone else—what difference does it make to you? Not with you, at any rate.” “Not with me,” repeated Belovzorov. “As you wish. Oh, all right. I’ll get you a horse.” “Only mind it isn’t some old cow. I warn you, I want to gallop.” “Gallop, by all means. But with whom? You won’t go riding with Malevsky, will you?” “And why not with him, O Great Warrior? Now please calm down and don’t glare at me like that. I’ll take you too. You know that for me Malevsky is now—ugh!” She tossed her head. “You say that to console me,” growled Belovzorov. Zinaida narrowed her eyes. “Does that console you? Oh, oh, oh, Great Warrior!” she said at last, as though unable to find another word. “And you, M’sieu Woldemar, would you come with us?” “I shouldn’t like to—not in—in a crowd,” I murmured without raising my eyes. “You prefer tête-à-tête? Well,” she added with a sigh, “freedom to the free; heaven—to the saints! Go along, Belovzorov, and do your best. I must have a horse for tomorrow.” “Yes, but where are you going to get the money?” the old princess put in. Zinaida wrinkled her brow. “I’m not asking you for it: Belovzorov will trust me.” “Trust you, trust you,” growled the old princess and suddenly shouted at the top of her voice, “Dunyashka!” “Mother, I’ve given you a bell,” the young princess observed. “Dunyashka!” the old woman shrieked again. Belovzorov took his leave; I left with him. Zinaida made no attempt to detain me. Next day I got up early, cut myself a stick, and went out for a walk beyond the toll gate. “I’ll go for a walk,” I thought to myself, “and get rid of my grief.” It was a beautiful day, sunny and not too hot; a gay, fresh wind roamed the earth, playing and murmuring away gently, setting everything astir but disturbing nothing. I wandered a long time, over hills and through woods; I did not feel happy; I had left home with the intention of giving myself up to melancholy thoughts; but youth, the glorious weather, the fresh air, the fun of rapid walking, the delight of lying on thick grass away from everyone, got the better of me: the recollection of those unforgettable words, of those kisses, again invaded my soul. I was glad to think that Zinaida could not but recognize my resolution, my heroism. “Others may please her better than I,” I thought, “let them! They will only tell her what they will do, while I have done it…. And that is not the only thing I could do for her!” I gave full rein to my imagination. I imagined how I would save her from the hands of enemies; how, covered with blood, I would drag her out of a dark dungeon; how I would die at her feet. I remembered a picture which hung in our drawing room: Malek-Adel carrying off Matilda—and at that very moment became absorbed in the appearance of a large, brightly coloured woodpecker, busily climbing up the slender trunk of a birch tree and peeping nervously from behind it, first to the right and then to the left, just like a double-bass player behind the neck of his instrument. Then I began singing, “Not white the snows,” and finished up with the at-the-time-popular song, “For you I wait when Zephyr wanton,” and so on. Then I began reciting aloud Yermak’s invocation to the stars from Khomyakov’s tragedy, attempted to compose something myself in a sentimental vein, and even thought of a line with which the whole of my poem was to conclude: “Oh, Zinaida, oh, Zinaida!”