continue..
and desire, and fear of life. But just then I understood nothing of it and could not have given a name to anything that was seething within me, or I should have called it all by one name—the name of Zinaida. And Zinaida continued to play with me like a cat with a mouse. Sometimes she would flirt with me, and I was all agitated and melting with emotion; at other times she would suddenly push me away, and I dared not go near her, dared not look at her. I remember she was very distant with me for several days. I was completely abashed and, dropping in timidly at the cottage, tried to keep close to the old princess, in spite of her being particularly loud-voiced and abusive just at that time: her financial affairs had been going badly and she had already had to give two statements to the police. One day as I was walking in the garden past the familiar fence I caught sight of Zinaida: she was sitting on the grass, her head propped up on both her hands, and did not stir. I was about to retreat cautiously, but she suddenly raised her head and signalled to me imperiously to come up to her. I was rooted to the spot: I failed to understand what she meant at first. She signalled to me again. I jumped over the fence at once and rushed joyfully up to her, but she stopped me with a glance and pointed to a path two paces away from her. Overcome with confusion and not knowing what to do, I knelt at the edge of the path. She was so pale, and such bitter grief, such profound weariness were manifest in every feature of her face that my heart contracted and I murmured involuntarily, “What’s the matter?” Zinaida stretched out her hand, tore off a blade of grass, bit it, and flung it from her as far as she could. “Do you love me very much?” she asked at last. “Do you?” I made no answer, and what need was there for me to answer? “You do,” she said, looking at me as before. “That is so. The same eyes,” she added; then sank into thought and buried her face in her hands. “I’m sick and tired of it all,” she whispered. “I wish I could go away somewhere, far, far away. I can’t bear it; I can’t do anything about it. And what sort of future can I hope for? Oh, I am so miserable! God, I am so miserable!” “Why?” I asked timidly. Zinaida did not reply, and only shrugged her shoulders. I remained on my knees, looking at her with blank despondency. Every word of hers cut me to the heart. At that moment I would, I believe, gladly have given up my life, if only she would have no more cause to grieve. I gazed at her, and, still not understanding why she was so unhappy, I vividly pictured to myself how, suddenly, in a fit of irrepressible sorrow, she had gone into the garden and collapsed on the ground as though felled by a blow. All round us everything was bright and green; the wind rustled in the leaves of the trees, now and again swinging a long raspberry cane over Zinaida’s head. Somewhere doves were cooing and bees were buzzing, flying low over the sparse grass. Overhead the sky was blue and tender—but I felt terribly sad. “Read me some poetry, please,” said Zinaida softly, raising herself on an elbow. “I like the way you read poetry. You speak it in a sing-song way, but that doesn’t matter; that is because you are so young. Read me ‘On the Hills of Georgia,’ only. first sit down.” I sat down and recited “On the Hills of Georgia.” “‘Which it cannot choose but love,’” Zinaida repeated. “That’s why poetry is so good: it speaks to us of what does not exist and which is not only better than what exists but even more like the truth…. ‘Which it cannot choose but love’—it would like not to, but cannot!” She fell silent again and suddenly started and got up. “Come along. Maydanov is in the house with Mother. He’s brought me his poem, but I left him. His feelings too are hurt now, but it can’t be helped. You’ll find out someday—only don’t be angry with me!” Zinaida pressed my hand hurriedly and ran on ahead. We went back to the cottage. Maydanov began reading to us his “Murderer,” which had just been published, but I did not listen to him. He shouted his four-foot iambics in a sing-song voice; the rhymes alternated, ringing like harness bells, loud and hollow, while I kept looking at Zinaida, trying to grasp the meaning of her last words. Or perchance some secret rival Hath without warning conquered thee? Maydanov cried suddenly in a nasal tone—and my eyes and Zinaida’s met. She dropped them and blushed slightly. I saw her blush, and froze with terror. I had been jealous of her before, but it was only at that moment that the thought that she was in love flashed through my mind. “Good Lord, she is in love!” From that moment my real torments began. I racked my brain, thought it over again and again, and kept a relentless, though as far as possible secret, watch on Zinaida. It was quite clear that a change had come over her. She went for walks alone and was away for hours. Sometimes she refused to see her visitors; she sat for hours in her room. This had never happened to her before. I had suddenly become—or imagined that I had become—extremely perspicacious. “It isn’t he, or is it?” I asked myself in alarm as I went over her different admirers in my mind. Count Malevsky (though for Zinaida’s sake I was ashamed to admit it to myself) I secretly regarded as more dangerous than the others. My powers of observation did not go farther than the end of my nose, and my secrecy most likely deceived no one; Dr. Lushin, at least, soon saw through me. He too, though, had changed of late. He had grown thinner; he laughed just as often, it is true, but his laughter somehow sounded more hollow, more spiteful, and much shorter, and in place of his former light irony and affected cynicism he now displayed a nervous irritability. “Why are you always hanging about here, young man?” he said to me one day when we were left alone together in the Zasyekins’ drawing room. (The young princess had not yet returned from her walk, and the shrill voice of the old princess could be heard on the first floor: she was having words with her maid.) “You ought to be studying, working, while you’re young, and what on earth do you think you’re doing?” “You can’t tell whether I work at home or not,” I replied, not without haughtiness, though not without some embarrassment, either. “Working indeed! You’ve something else on your mind. Well, I won’t argue with you about it. At your age it’s what one would expect. Except that you’ve been terribly unlucky in your choice. Don’t you see what sort of house this is?” “I don’t know what you’re talking about,” I said. “Don’t you? So much the worse for you. I consider it my duty to warn you. It’s all right for old bachelors like me to go on coming here: nothing much could happen to us, could it? We’ve been hardened in the battle of life. Nothing can hurt us now. But you’ve still got a tender skin. The atmosphere here is bad for you. Believe me, you might become infected.” “What do you mean?” “You know what I mean. Are you well now? Are you in a normal condition? Is what you feel now healthy for you? Is it good for you?” “Why, what am I feeling?” I said, while in my heart I realized full well that the doctor was right. “Oh, young man, young man,” the doctor went on, looking as though there was something highly insulting to me in those two words, “you can’t deceive me! For, thank God, one can still read your face like an open book. However, what’s the use of talking? I wouldn’t be coming here myself if”—the doctor gritted his teeth—“if I hadn’t been as big a fool as you. What I’m really surprised at, though, is how, with your intelligence, you can’t see what is going on round you.” “Why, what is going on?” I said, all ears. The doctor looked at me with a sort of mocking pity. “I’m a fine one too,” he said, as though to himself. “Why should I be telling him this? In short,” he added, raising his voice, “let me tell you again: the atmosphere here is no good for you. You like it here, but what