continue..
stood up, looked affectionately at Semyon, but was unable to speak a word. “Why don’t you say something? We can’t spend the winter here. We must get to shelter. Now, then, lean on my stick, if you don’t feel strong enough. Bestir yourself!” And the man started to move. And he walked easily, and did not lag behind. As they walked along the road Semyon said: “Where are you from, if I may ask?” “I do not belong hereabouts.” “No; I know all the people of this region. How did you happen to come here and get to that chapel?” “I cannot tell you.” “Someone must have treated you outrageously.” “No one has treated me outrageously. God has punished me.” “God does all things, but you must have been on the road bound for somewhere. Where do you want to go?” “It makes no difference to me.” Semyon was surprised. The man did not look like a malefactor, and his speech was gentle, but he seemed reticent about himself. And Semyon said to himself: “Such things as this do not happen every day.” And he said to the man, “Well, come to my house, though you will find it very narrow quarters.” As Semyon approached the yard, the stranger did not lag behind, but walked abreast of him. The wind had arisen, and searched under Semyon’s shirt, and as the effect of the wine had now passed away, he began to be chilled to the bone. He walked along, and began to snuffle, and he muffled his wife’s jacket closer around him, and he said to himself: “That’s the way you get a shuba! You go after a shuba, and you come home without your caftan! yes, and you bring with you a naked man—besides, Matriona won’t take kindly to it!” And as soon as the thought of Matriona occurred to him, he began to feel downhearted. But as soon as his eyes fell on the stranger, he remembered what a look he had given him behind the chapel, and his heart danced with joy. Semyon’s wife had finished her work early. She had chopped wood, brought water, fed the children, taken her own supper, and was now deliberating when it would be best to mix some bread, “today or tomorrow?” A large crust was still left. She said to herself: “If Semyon gets something to eat in town, he won’t care for much supper, and the bread will last till tomorrow.” Matriona contemplated the crust for some time, and said: “I am not going to mix any bread. There’s just enough flour to make one more loaf. We shall get along till Friday.” Matriona put away the bread, and sat down at the table to sew a patch on her husband’s shirt. She sewed, and thought how her husband would be buying sheepskins for the shuba. “I hope the fur dealer will not cheat him. For he is as simple as he can be. He, himself, would not cheat anybody, but a baby could lead him by the nose. Eight rubles is no small sum. You can get a fine shuba with it. Perhaps not one tanned, but still a good one. How we suffered last winter without any shuba! Could not go to the river nor anywhere! And whenever he went outdoors, he put on all the clothes, and I hadn’t anything to wear. He is late in getting home. He ought to be here by this time. Can my sweetheart have got drunk?” Just as these thoughts were passing through her mind the doorsteps creaked: someone was at the door. Matriona stuck in the needle, and went to the entry. There she saw two men had come in—Semyon, and with him a strange peasant, without a cap and in felt boots. Matriona perceived immediately that her husband’s breath smelled of liquor. “Now,” she said to herself, “he has gone and got drunk.” And when she saw that he had not his caftan on, and wore only her jacket, and had nothing in his hands, and said nothing, but only simpered, Matriona’s heart failed within her. “He has drunk up the money, he has been on a spree with this miserable beggar; and, worse than all, he has gone and brought him home!” Matriona let them pass by her into the cottage; then she herself went in; she saw that the stranger was young, and that he had on their caftan. There was no shirt to be seen under the caftan; and he wore no cap. As soon as he went in, he paused, and did not move and did not raise his eyes. And Matriona thought: “He is not a good man; his conscience troubles him.” Matriona scowled, went to the oven, and watched to see what they would do. Semyon took off his cap and sat down on the bench good-naturedly. “Well,” said he, “Matriona, can’t you get us something to eat?” Matriona muttered something under her breath. She did not offer to move, but as she stood by the oven she looked from one to the other and kept shaking her head. Semyon saw that his wife was out of sorts and would not do anything, but he pretended not to notice it, and took the stranger by the arm. “Sit down, brother,” says he; “we’ll have some supper.” The stranger sat down on the bench. “Well,” says Semyon, “haven’t you cooked anything?” Matriona’s anger blazed out. “I cooked,” said she, “but not for you. You are a fine man! I see you have been drinking! You went to get a shuba, and you have come home without your caftan. And, then, you have brought home this naked vagabond with you. I haven’t any supper for such drunkards as you are!” “That’ll do, Matriona; what is the use of letting your tongue run on so? If you had only asked first: ‘What kind of a man…” “You just tell me what you have done with the money!” Semyon went to his caftan, took out the bill, and spread it out. “Here’s the money, but Trifonof did not pay me; he promised it tomorrow.” Matriona grew still more angry: “You didn’t buy the new shuba, and you have given away your only caftan to this naked vagabond whom you have brought home!” She snatched the money from the table, and went off to hide it away, saying: “I haven’t any supper. I can’t feed all your drunken beggars!” “Hey there! Matriona, just hold your tongue! First you listen to what I have to say…” “Much sense should I hear from a drunken fool! Good reason I had for not wanting to marry such a drunkard as you are. Mother gave me linen, and you have wasted it in drink; you went to get a shuba, and you spent it for drink.” Semyon was going to assure his wife that he had spent only twenty kopecks for drink; he was going to tell her where he had found the man; but Matriona would not give him a chance to speak a word; it was perfectly marvelous, but she managed to speak two words at once! Things that had taken place ten years before—she called them all up. Matriona scolded and scolded; then she sprang at Semyon, and seized him by the sleeve. “Give me back my jacket! It’s the only one I have, and you took it from me and put it on yourself. Give it here, you miserable dog! bestir yourself, you villain!” Semyon began to strip off the jacket. As he was pulling his arms out of the sleeves, his wife gave it a twitch and split the jacket up the seams. Matriona snatched the garment away, threw it over her head, and started for the door. She intended to go out, but she paused, and her heart was pulled in two directions—she wanted to vent her spite, and she wanted to find what kind of a man the stranger was. Matriona paused, and said: “If he were a good man, then he would not have been naked; why, even now, he hasn’t any shirt on; if he had been engaged in decent business, you would have told where you discovered such an elegant fellow!” “Well, I was going to tell you. I was walking along, and there, behind the chapel, this man was sitting, stark naked, and half frozen to death. It is not summer, mind you, for a naked man! God brought me to him, else he would have perished. Now what could I do? Such things don’t happen every day. I took and dressed him, and brought him home with me. Calm your anger. It’s a sin, Matriona; we must all die.” Matriona was about to make a surly reply, but her eyes fell on the stranger, and she held her peace. The stranger was sitting motionless on the edge of the bench, just as he had sat down. His hands were