continue..
her eyes off me. “Why, no, ma’am.” “Would you like to help me wind some wool? Follow me, please. This way—to my room.” She nodded to me and left the drawing room. I followed her. In the room we entered, the furniture was a little better and arranged with more taste. At that moment, though, I was quite unable to notice anything: I moved as though in a dream and was overwhelmed by an intense feeling of happiness verging on imbecility. The young princess sat down, took a skein of red wool, and, motioning me to a chair opposite, carefully untied the skein and put it across my hands. All this she did in silence with a kind of amused deliberation and with the same bright, sly smile on her slightly parted lips. She began to wind the wool round a bent card and then suddenly dazzled me with so swift and radiant a glance that I could not help dropping my eyes. When her eyes, mostly half-closed, opened wide, her face was completely transformed, as though flooded with light. “What did you think of me yesterday, M’sieu Woldemar?” she asked, after a short pause. “I expect you must have thought me dreadful.” “Why, I—er—Princess—I—I—didn’t think anything—how—could—I?” I replied in confusion. “Listen,” she said. “You don’t know me yet. I’m an awfully strange person. I want people to tell me the truth always. You are sixteen, I hear, and I am twenty-one. You see, I’m very much older than you, and that is why you must always tell me the truth—and,” she added, “do what I tell you. Look at me! Why don’t you look at me?” I was more confused than ever, but I did raise my eyes and look at her. She smiled, not as before, but approvingly. “Look at me,” she said, dropping her voice caressingly. “I do not mind it at all. I like your face. I have a feeling we shall be friends. And do you like me?” she added slyly. “Princess—” I began. “First of all, you must call me Zinaida Alexandrovna, and, second, what a strange habit children”—she quickly corrected herself—“young men have of not saying frankly what they feel. That’s all very well for grown ups. You do like me, don’t you?” Though I was very pleased that she should be talking so frankly to me, I was a little hurt. I wanted to show her that she was not dealing with a mere boy, and, assuming as serious and nonchalant an air as I could, I said, “Of course I like you very much, Zinaida Alexandrovna. I have no wish to conceal it.” She shook her head slowly. “Have you a tutor?” she asked suddenly. “No, I haven’t had one for ages.” I was telling a lie: it was not a month since I had parted with my Frenchman. “Oh, I see, you’re quite grown up.” She rapped me lightly over the fingers. “Hold your hands straight!” And she busily began winding the ball of wool. I took advantage of the fact that she did not raise her eyes to examine her at first stealthily and then more and more boldly. I thought her face was even more lovely than on the previous day: everything in it was so delicate, intelligent, and charming. She was sitting with her back to the window, which was covered with a white blind: the sunshine streaming through the blind shed a soft light on her fine, golden hair, her virginal throat, her sloping shoulders, and her calm, tender bosom. I gazed at her—and how dear and near she was already to me! I couldn’t help feeling that I had known her a long, long time and that before her I had known nothing and had not lived. She was wearing a dark, rather old and worn dress with an apron; I would gladly have caressed every fold of that dress and that apron. The tips of her shoes peeped from under her skirt: I could have knelt in adoration to those shoes! “And here I am, sitting in front of her,” I thought. “I have made her acquaintance. God! What happiness!” I almost leapt from my chair in ecstasy, but, in fact, all I did was to swing my legs a little, like a child eating a sweet. I was as happy as a fish in water. I could have stayed in that room forever. I could have never left it. Her eyelids were slowly raised and once more her bright eyes shone caressingly upon me, and again she smiled. “How you do look at me!” she said slowly, and she shook a finger at me. I blushed. “She understands everything; she sees everything,” flashed across my mind. “And how could she fail to understand it all and see it all?” Suddenly there was a clatter in the next room—a sabre clanked. “Zeena,” the old princess cried from the drawing room, “Belovzorov has brought you a kitten!” “A kitten!” cried Zinaida, and, rising impetuously from her chair, she threw the ball of wool into my lap and ran out of the room. I too got up and, leaving the skein and the ball of wool on the window-sill, went out into the drawing room and stopped dead in amazement: a tabby kitten was lying in the middle of the room with its paws in the air; Zinaida was on her knees before it, cautiously lifting up its tiny head. Near the old princess, almost filling the entire space between the two windows, I saw a fair-haired and curly-headed, stalwart, young hussar officer, with a pink face and protruding eyes. “What a funny little thing!” Zinaida was saying. “And its eyes aren’t grey—they’re green—and what enormous ears he’s got! Thank you, Victor! How sweet of you.” The hussar, whom I recognized as one of the young men I had seen the previous evening, smiled and bowed, clicking his spurs and clinking the chain of his sabre. “You were pleased to say yesterday that you’d like to have a tabby kitten with large ears, so I—I got one. Your word is law.” And he bowed again. The kitten miaowed feebly and began to sniff the floor. “It’s hungry!” cried Zinaida. “Vonifaty, Sonia, bring some milk.” The maid, in an old yellow dress and with a faded kerchief round her neck, came in with a saucer of milk in her hands and set it before the kitten. The kitten gave a start, screwed up its eyes, and began to lap. “What a pink little tongue it’s got!” observed Zinaida, bending her head almost to the floor and looking at the kitten sideways under its very nose. The kitten drank its fill and began purring and moving its paws up and down finickingly. Zinaida got up and, turning to the maid, said in an indifferent voice, “Take it away.” “Allow me to kiss your hand in return for the kitten,” said the hussar, flashing his teeth and flexing his whole powerful frame, tightly encased in a new uniform. “Both of them,” replied Zinaida, and she held out her hands to him. While he kissed them, she looked at me over his shoulder. I stood stock still and did not know whether to laugh, to say something, or to remain silent. Suddenly I caught sight of our footman, Fyodor, through the open passage door. He was making signs to me. Mechanically I went out to him. “What are you doing here?” I asked. “Your mother has sent for you,” he said in a whisper. “She is angry because you haven’t come back with the answer.” “Why, have I been here long?” “Over an hour, sir.” “Over an hour!” I repeated involuntarily and, returning to the drawing room, I began to take my leave, bowing and scraping my feet. “Where are you off to?” asked the young princess, glancing at me from behind the hussar. “I’m afraid I have to go home…. So I am to say,” I added, turning to the old woman, “that you will call on us about two o’clock?” “Yes, do say that, dear boy.” The old princess hurriedly reached for a snuff-box and took the snuff so noisily that it almost made me jump. “Yes, do say that,” she repeated, blinking tearfully and groaning. I bowed once more, turned, and walked out of the room with that uncomfortable sensation in my back which a very young man feels when he knows he is being watched from behind. “Mind you come and see us again, M’sieu Woldemar!” cried Zinaida, and laughed again. “Why is she always laughing?” I thought as I was returning home, accompanied by Fyodor, who said nothing to me, but walked behind me with a disapproving air. My mother scolded me and wondered what I could have been doing so long at the princess’s. I made no answer and went off to my room. Suddenly I felt very sad. I tried hard not to