continue..
thus: ‘You three, have mercy on us three.’” And as soon as the venerable hermit said this, all three of the hermits raised their eyes to heaven, and all three said, “Troe vas, troe nas, pomiluï nas!” The bishop smiled, and said: “You have heard this about the Holy Trinity, but you should not pray so. I have taken a fancy to you, men of God. I see that you desire to please God, but you know not how to serve Him. You should not pray so; but listen to me, I will teach you. I shall not teach you my own words, but shall teach you from God’s scriptures how God commanded all people to pray to God.” And the bishop began to explain to the hermits how God revealed Himself to men. He taught them about God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, and said: “God the Son came upon earth to save men, and this is the way He taught all men to pray; listen, and repeat after me—” And the bishop began to say: “Our Father.” And one hermit repeated: “Our Father.” And then the second repeated: “Our Father.” And the third also repeated: “Our Father.” “Who art in heaven”; and the hermits tried to repeat, “Who art in heaven.” But the middle hermit mixed the words up, he could not repeat them so; and the tall, naked hermit could not repeat them—his mustache had grown so as to cover his mouth, he could not speak distinctly; and the venerable, toothless hermit could not stammer the words intelligibly. The bishop said it a second time; the hermits repeated it again. And the bishop sat down on a little boulder, and the hermits stood about him; and they looked at his lips, and they repeated it after him until they knew it. And all that day till evening the bishop labored with them; and ten times, and twenty times, and a hundred times, he repeated each word, and the hermits learned it by rote. And when they got mixed up, he set them right, and made then begin all over again. And the bishop did not leave the hermits until he had taught them the whole of the Lord’s Prayer. They repeated it after him, and then by themselves. First of all, the middle hermit learned it, and he repeated it from beginning to end; and the bishop bade him say it again and again, and still again to repeat it; and the others also learned the whole prayer. It was already beginning to grow dark, and the moon was just coming up out of the sea, when the bishop arose to go back to the ship. The bishop said farewell to the hermits; they all bowed very low before him. He raised them to their feet and kissed each of them, bade them pray as he had taught them; and he took his seat in the boat, and returned to the ship. And while the bishop was rowed back to the ship, he heard all the time how the hermits were repeating the Lord’s Prayer at the top of their voices. They returned to the ship, and here the voices of the hermits could no longer be heard; but they could still see, in the light of the moon, the three old men standing in the very same place on the shore—one shorter than the rest in the middle, with the tall one on the right, and the other on the left hand. The bishop returned to the ship, climbed up on deck; the anchor was hoisted; the sails were spread, and bellied with wind; the ship began to move, and they sailed away. The bishop came to the stern, and took a seat there, and kept looking at the little island. At first the hermits were to be seen; then they were hidden from sight, and only the island was visible; and then the island went out of sight, and only the sea was left playing in the moonlight. The pilgrims lay down to sleep, and all was quiet on deck. But the bishop cared not to sleep; he sat by himself in the stern, looked out over the sea in the direction where the island had faded from sight, and thought about the good hermits. He thought of how they had rejoiced in what they had learned in the prayer; and he thanked God because He had led him to the help of the hermits, in teaching them the word of God. Thus the bishop was sitting and thinking, looking at the sea in the direction where the little island lay hidden. And his eyes were filled with the moonlight, as it danced here and there on the waves. Suddenly he saw something shining and gleaming white in the track of the moon. Was it a bird, a gull, or a boat sail gleaming white? The bishop strained his sight. “A sailboat,” he said to himself, “is chasing us. Yes, it is catching up with us very rapidly. It was far, far off, but now it is close to us. But, after all, it is not much like a sailboat. Anyway, something is chasing us, and catching up with us.” And the bishop could not decide what it was—a boat, or not a boat; a bird, or not a bird; a fish, or not a fish. It was like a man, but very great; but a man could not be in the midst of the sea. The bishop got up and went to the helmsman. “Look!” says he, “what is that? what is that, brother? what is it?” said the bishop. But by this time he himself saw. It was the hermits running over sea. Their gray beards gleamed white, and shone; and they drew near the ship as if it were stationary. The helmsman looked. He was scared, dropped the tiller, and cried with a loud voice: “Lord! the hermits are running over the sea as if it were dry land!” The people heard and sprang up; all rushed aft. All beheld the hermits running, hand in hand. The end ones swung their arms; they signaled the ship to come to. All three ran over the water as if it were dry land, and did not move their feet. It was not possible to bring the ship to before the hermits overtook it, came on board, raised their heads, and said with one voice: “We have forgotten, servant of God, we have forgotten what thou didst teach us. While we were learning it, we remembered it; but when we ceased for an hour to repeat it, one word slipped away; we have forgotten it: the whole was lost. We remembered none of it; teach it to us again.” The bishop crossed himself, bowed low to the hermits, and said: “Acceptable to God is your prayer, ye hermits. It is not for me to teach you. Pray for us sinners.” And the bishop bowed before the feet of the hermits. And the hermits paused, turned about, and went back over the sea. And until the morning, there was something seen shining in the direction where the hermits had gone.