continue..
young men presented their foreheads so eagerly, and there was in the movements of the young girl (I saw her in profile) something so fascinating, imperious, caressing, mocking, and charming, that I nearly cried out with wonder and delight and would, I believe, have given everything in the world at that moment to have those lovely fingers tap me on the forehead too. My gun slipped to the grass; I forgot everything; my eyes devoured this graceful figure, the slender neck, the beautiful arms, the slightly untidy fair hair under the white kerchief, and the half-closed, intelligent eye, the eyelashes, the delicate cheek beneath them. “I say, young man,” said a voice suddenly near me, “is it proper to stare like that at young ladies you do not know?” I started, thunderstruck. Near me, on the other side of the fence, stood a man with close-cropped black hair, looking ironically at me. At that very moment the young girl too turned towards me. I saw a pair of enormous grey eyes in a vivacious, lively face, and this face suddenly quivered and laughed; her white teeth flashed and her eyebrows lifted in a rather amusing fashion. I flushed, snatched up my gun from the ground, and, pursued by ringing though not unkind laughter, fled to my room, flung myself on the bed, and covered my face with my hands. My heart leapt inside me; I was very ashamed and happy; I felt tremendously excited. After a short rest I brushed my hair, tidied myself, and went downstairs to tea. The image of the young girl floated before me; my heart was no longer leaping but seemed to contract delightfully. “What’s the matter with you?” my father asked me suddenly. “Shot a crow?” I was about to tell him everything, but stopped short and merely smiled to myself. As I was going to bed, without knowing myself why, I spun round three times on one foot, put pomade on my hair, got into bed, and slept soundly all night. Before morning I woke up for a moment, raised my head, looked round me in ecstasy, and—fell asleep again. “How can I get to know them?” was my first thought when I woke in the morning. Before breakfast I went for a walk in the garden, but did not go too near the fence and saw no one. After breakfast I walked several times up and down the street before the cottage and peered into the windows from a distance. I thought I could see her face behind the curtain, and I walked away quickly in a panic. “Still, I must get to know them,” I thought, walking aimlessly about the sandy stretch before the Neskoochny Park. “But how? That is the question.” I recalled the minutest details of yesterday’s meeting: for some reason I had a most vivid recollection of the way she had laughed at me. But while I worried and made all sorts of plans, fate was already doing her best to gratify my desire. While I was out, my mother had received from her new neighbour a letter on grey paper, sealed with the sort of brown wax that is used only in official post office notices and on the corks of bottles of cheap wine. In this letter, illiterate and written in a slovenly hand, the princess begged my mother to do her a great favour: my mother, the princess wrote, was on very intimate terms with people in high positions on whom depended the fortunes of herself and her children, for she was engaged in a number of very important lawsuits. “I rite to you,” she wrote, “as one noblewoman to another, and becos of that I am pleesed to make use of this oportunity.” In conclusion she asked my mother’s permission to call on her. I found my mother in a disagreeable mood: my father was not at home, and she had no one to consult. Not to reply to a “noblewoman,” and a princess into the bargain, was impossible. But my mother was at a loss as to how to reply. To write a note in French was, she thought, inappropriate, while she was not particularly good at Russian spelling herself. She knew this and did not want to compromise herself. She was therefore glad of my return and at once told me to go round to the princess and explain to her by word of mouth that she was always ready to be of service to Her Highness as far as was in her power and she asked the princess to do her the honour of calling on her at one o’clock. The unexpectedly rapid fulfilment of my secret desires both delighted and frightened me; however, I did not show any sign of the confusion that overcame me and went first to my room to put on my new cravat and frock-coat: at home I still went about in a tunic and a turned-down collar, although I was sick and tired of them. In the narrow and untidy passage of the cottage, which I entered shaking nervously all over, I was met by a grey-headed old servant with a face the colour of dark copper, surly little pig’s eyes and deep furrows on his forehead, and temples such as I had never seen in my life before. He was carrying a plate with a clean-picked herring bone on it, and, shutting the door leading into another room with his foot, said in an abrupt tone of voice, “What do you want?” “Is Princess Zasyekin at home?” I asked. “Vonifaty!” a woman’s cracked voice screamed from behind the door. The man-servant turned his back on me without a word, revealing the extremely threadbare back of his livery with a solitary, rusty crested button, and, putting the plate down on the floor, went away. “Have you been to the police station?” the same woman’s voice repeated. The man muttered something in reply. “What? Someone’s come?” I heard her say again. “The young gentleman from next door? Well, ask him in.” “Will you step into the drawing room, sir?” said the servant, reappearing before me again and picking up the plate from the floor. I put myself to rights and went into the “drawing room.” I found myself in a small and not particularly tidy room with rather shoddy furniture which seemed to have been arranged in a hurry. By the window, in an arm-chair with a broken arm, sat a woman of about fifty, bare-headed and rather plain, in an old green dress with a striped worsted kerchief round her neck. She glanced at me with her small black eyes. I went up to her and bowed. “Have I the honour to address Princess Zasyekin?” “I am Princess Zasyekin. Are you the son of Mr. W.?” “Yes, ma’am, I am. I have come to you with a message from my mother.” “Sit down, please. Vonifaty, where are my keys? You haven’t seen them, have you?” I told Princess Zasyekin my mother’s reply to her note. She listened to me, drumming on the window-sill with her thick, red fingers, and when I had finished, she stared at me once more. “Very good, I shall certainly call,” she said at last “But, gracious me, how young you are! How old are you, may I ask?” “S-sixteen,” I replied with an involuntary stammer. The princess pulled out of her pocket some greasy papers covered with writing, raised them to her nose, and began looking through them. “An excellent age,” she said suddenly, turning to me and fidgeting in her chair. “Please make yourself at home. We’re ordinary people here.” “A bit too ordinary,” I thought to myself, glancing with a feeling of involuntary disgust at her unprepossessing person. At that moment another door was flung open and in the doorway there appeared the girl I had seen in the garden the previous evening. She raised her hand, and a mocking smile appeared for a moment on her face. “And here’s my daughter,” said the princess, pointing to her with her elbow. “Zeena, darling, this is the son of our neighbour, Mr. W. What’s your name, may I ask?” “V-Vladimir,” I replied, getting up and stuttering in my excitement. “And your patronymic?” “Petrovich.” “I see. I used to know a police commissioner once. He was also called Vladimir Petrovich. Vonifaty, don’t look for the keys—they are in my pocket.” The young girl continued to look at me with the same mocking smile, screwing up her eyes slightly and putting her head a little on one side. “I’ve already met M’sieu Woldemar,” she began. (The silvery sound of her voice ran through me with a kind of delightful shiver.) “You don’t mind me calling you that, do you?” “Why, of course not,” I murmured. “Where was that?” asked the princess. The young princess did not answer. “You haven’t got anything special to do now, have you?” she asked, without taking