Work: The Three Hermits Field: three hermits Author: Leo Tolstoy Matthew, VI, 7–8. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be ye not therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him. A bishop set sail in a ship from the city of Archangel to Solovki. In the same ship sailed some pilgrims to the saints. The wind was propitious, the weather was clear, the sea was not rough. The pilgrims, some of whom were lying down, some lunching, some sitting in little groups, conversed together. The bishop also came on deck and began to walk up and down on the bridge. As he approached the bow, he saw a knot of people crowded together. A little muzhik was pointing his hand at something in the sea, and talking; and the people were listening. The bishop stood still, and looked where the little muzhik was pointing; nothing was to be seen, except the sea glittering in the sun. The bishop came closer and began to listen. When the little muzhik saw the bishop, he took off his cap, and stopped speaking. The people also? when they saw the bishop, took off their hats, and paid their respects. “Don’t mind me, brothers,” said the bishop. “I have also come to listen to what you are saying, my good friend.” “This fisherman was telling us about some hermits,” said a merchant, who was bolder than the rest. “What about the hermits?” asked the bishop, as he came to the gunwale, and sat down on a box. “Tell me too; I should like to hear. What were you pointing at?” “Well, then, yonder’s the little island just heaving in sight,” said the little peasant; and he pointed toward the port side. “On that very islet, three hermits live, working out their salvation.” “Where is the little island?” asked the bishop. “Here, look along my arm, if you please. You see that little cloud? Well, just below it to the left it shows like a streak.” The bishop looked and looked; the water gleamed in the sun, but from lack of practice he could not see anything. “I don’t see it,” says he. “What sort of hermits are they who live on the little island?” “God’s people,” replied the peasant. “For a long time I had heard tell of them, but I never chanced to see them until last summer.” And the fisherman again began to relate how he had been out fishing, and how he was driven to that island, and knew not where he was. In the morning he started to look around, and stumbled upon a little earthen hut; and he found in the hut one hermit, and then two others came in. They fed him, and dried him, and helped him repair his boat. “What sort of men were they” asked the bishop. “One was rather small, humpbacked, very, very old; he was dressed in well-worn stole; he must have been more than a hundred years old; the gray hairs in his beard were already turning green; but he always had a smile ready, and he was as serene as an angel of heaven. The second was taller, also old, in a torn caftan; his long beard was growing a little yellowish, but he was a strong man; he turned my boat over as if it had been a tub, and I didn’t even have to help him: he was also a jolly man. But the third was tall, with a long beard reaching to his knee, and white as the moon; but he was gloomy; his eyes glared out from under beetling brows; and he was naked, all save a plaited belt.” “What did they say to you?” asked the bishop. “They did everything mostly without speaking, and they talked very little among themselves; one had only to look, and the other understood. I began to ask the tall one if they had lived there long. He frowned, muttered something, grew almost angry: then the little old man instantly seized him by the hand, smiled, and the large man said nothing. But the old man said, ‘Excuse us,’ and smiled.” While the peasant was speaking, the ship had been sailing nearer and nearer to the islands. “There, now you can see plainly,” said the merchant. “Now, please look, your reverence,” said he, pointing. The bishop tried to look, and he barely managed to make out a black speck—the little island. The bishop gazed and gazed; and he went from the bow to the stern, and he approached the helmsman. “What is that little island,” says he, “that you see over yonder?” “As far as I know, it has no name; there are a good many of them here.” “Is it true as they say, that some monks are winning their salvation there?” “They say so, your reverence, but I don’t rightly know. Fishermen, they say, have seen them. Still, folks talk a good deal of nonsense.” “I should like to land on the little island, and see the hermits,” said the bishop. “How can I manage it?” “It is impossible to go there in the ship,” said the helmsman. “You might do it in a boat, but you will have to ask the captain.” They summoned the captain. “I should like to have a sight of those hermits,” said the bishop. “Is it out of the question to take me there?” The captain tried to dissuade him. “It is possible, quite possible, but we should waste much time; and I take the liberty of assuring your reverence, they are not worth looking at. I have heard from people that those old men are perfectly stupid; they don’t understand anything, and can’t say anything, just like some sort of sea fish.” “I wish it,” said the bishop. “I will pay for the trouble, if you will take me there.” There was nothing else to be done: the sailors arranged it; they shifted sail. The helmsman put the ship about and they sailed toward the island. A chair was set for the bishop on the bow. He sat down and looked. And all the people gathered on the bow, all looked at the little island. And those who had trustworthy eyes already began to see rocks on the island, and point out the hut. And one even saw the three hermits. The captain got out a spyglass, gazed through it, handed it to the bishop. “He is quite right,” said the captain; “there on the shore at the right, standing on a great rock, are three men.” The bishop also looked through the glass; he pointed it in the right direction and plainly saw the three men standing there—one tall, the second shorter, but the third very short. They were standing on the shore, hand in hand. The captain came to the bishop: “Here, your reverence, the ship must come to anchor; if it suit you, you can be put ashore in a yawl, and we will anchor out here and wait for you.” Immediately they got the tackle ready, cast anchor, and furled the sails; the vessel brought up, began to roll. They lowered a boat, the rowers manned it, and the bishop started to climb down by the companionway. The bishop climbed down, took his seat on the thwart; the rowers lifted their oars; they sped away to the island. They sped away like a stone from a sling; they could see the three old men standing—the tall one naked, with his plaited belt; the shorter one in his torn caftan; and the little old humpbacked one, in his old stole—all three were standing there, hand in hand. The sailors reached shore and caught hold with the boat hook. The bishop got out. The hermits bowed before him; he blessed them; they bowed still lower. And the bishop began to speak to them: “I heard,” says he, “that you hermits were here, working out your salvation, that you pray Christ our God for your fellow men; and I am here by God’s grace, an unworthy servant of Christ, called to be a shepherd to His flock; and so I desired also, if I might, to give instruction to you, who are the servants of God.” The hermits made no reply; they smiled, they exchanged glances. “Tell me how you are working out your salvation, and how you serve God,” said the bishop. The middle hermit sighed, and looked at the aged one, at the venerable one; the tall hermit frowned, and looked at the aged one, at the venerable one. And the venerable old hermit smiled, and said: “Servant of God, we have not the skill to serve God; we only serve ourselves, getting something to eat.” “How do you pray to God?” asked the bishop. And the venerable hermit said: “We pray