continue..
and mysterious sounds coming from afar. Zinaida did not let him finish. “If we have to have fiction,” she said, “then let everyone tell something he has made up.” It was Belovzorov again who had to begin. The young hussar looked embarrassed. “I can’t think of anything!” he exclaimed. “What nonsense!” Zinaida cried. “Well, imagine, for instance, that you are married and tell us how you would spend your time with your wife. Would you lock her up?” “Yes, I should.” “And would you stay with her yourself?” “Yes, I should most certainly stay with her myself.” “Excellent. But what if she got tired of it and was unfaithful to you?” “I’d kill her.” “And if she ran away?” “I’d catch up with her and kill her all the same.” “I see. Well, and suppose I were your wife, what would you do then?” Belovzorov was silent for a minute. “I’d kill myself.” Zinaida laughed. “I can see that your tale is quickly told.” The next forfeit was Zinaida’s. She lifted her eyes to the ceiling and sank into thought. “Now listen,” she began at last, “this is what I have thought of. Imagine a magnificent palace, a summer night, and a wonderful ball. The ball is being given by a young queen. Everywhere is gold, marble, crystal, silk, lights, diamonds, flowers, burning joss-sticks, all the wild extravagances of luxury.” “You like luxury?” Lushin interrupted her. “Luxury is beautiful,” she replied, “and I love everything beautiful.” “More than the beautiful?” he asked. “That sounds a little too clever,” she replied. “I don’t understand it. Please don’t interrupt. And so, the ball is magnificent. Lots and lots of guests, and all of them are young, handsome, and brave, and all are head over heels in love with the queen.” “Are there no women among the guests?” Malevsky asked. “No, or wait—there are.” “Are they all unattractive?” “No, they’re lovely. But the men are all in love with the queen. She is tall and graceful, and she has a little gold diadem on her black hair.” I looked at Zinaida, and at that moment she seemed to me so much above us all, there was such bright intelligence and such power about her white forehead and her motionless eyebrows, that I could not help thinking, “You are that queen yourself!” “They all crowd round her,” Zinaida went on, “they all lavish the most flattering speeches upon her.” “Why, does she like flattery?” asked Lushin. “What an insufferable creature you are! You will interrupt. Who doesn’t like flattery?” “Just one last question,” Malevsky observed. “Has the queen a husband?” “I hadn’t thought of that. No, why a husband?” “Naturally,” Malevsky put in. “Why should she?” “Silence!” cried Maydanov in French, which he spoke badly. “Merci,” Zinaida said to him. “And so,” she went on, “the queen listens to these speeches, listens to the music, but does not look at any of the guests. Six windows are open from top to bottom, from floor to ceiling, and beyond them is a dark sky with big stars and a dark garden with big trees. The queen looks out into the garden. There, near the trees, is a fountain: it is white in the darkness, and it is tall, tall like a ghost. The queen hears through the talk and the music the soft plashing of its waters. She looks and thinks, ‘You, gentlemen, are all noble, intelligent, rich, you crowd round me, you treasure every word I utter, you are all ready to die at my feet, I have you all in my power. But there, near the fountain, near that plashing water, he whom I love and who holds me in his power awaits me. He wears neither costly garments nor precious stones, no one knows him, but he waits for me, certain that I will come—and I will come, and there is no power on earth which can stop me when I want to go to him, stay with him, and lose myself with him there in the darkness of the garden, with the whispering trees and the plashing of the fountain….’” Zinaida fell silent. “Is this—fiction?” Malevsky inquired cunningly. Zinaida did not even look at him. “And what should we have done, gentlemen,” Lushin suddenly said, “if we had been among the guests and had known of the lucky fellow at the fountain?” “Wait, wait,” Zinaida interrupted. “I will myself tell you what each of you would have done. You, Belovzorov, would have challenged him to a duel; you, Maydanov, would have written an epigram on him—though, no, you don’t know how to write epigrams: you would have written a long poem on him in iambics, something in the style of Barbier, and would have published it in the Telegraph. You, Nirmatsky, would have borrowed—no, you would have loaned him money at high interest. You, Doctor…” She stopped. “I’m sorry, but I really don’t know what you would have done.” “As her court physician,” replied Lushin, “I should have advised the queen not to give balls when she was not in the mood for entertaining guests.” “Perhaps you’d have been right. And you, Count?” “And I?” Malevsky repeated with his evil smile. “You would have offered him a poisoned sweet.” Malevsky’s face became slightly twisted and for a moment assumed a villainous look, but he burst out laughing immediately. “As for you, Woldemar…” Zinaida went on. “But I suppose that’s enough. Let’s play another game.” “M’sieu Woldemar, as the queen’s page, would have carried her train as she ran into the garden,” Malevsky remarked venomously. I flushed, but Zinaida quickly laid a hand on my shoulder and, getting up, said in a slightly trembling voice, “I never gave your lordship the right to be insolent, and I must ask you to leave.” She pointed to the door. “Good Lord, Princess,” murmured Malevsky, turning very pale. “The princess is right,” cried Belovzorov and he too rose. “Good Lord, I never expected—” Malevsky went on. “I—I believe there was nothing in my words—I had never intended to insult you…. Forgive me.” Zinaida looked him up and down very coldly and smiled coldly. “You may stay, if you like,” she said, with a careless gesture of the hand. “M’sieu Woldemar and I have no real cause to be angry. You seem to enjoy stinging people—much good may it do you.” “Forgive me,” Malevsky repeated. But I, recalling Zinaida’s gesture, could not help reflecting once more that no real queen could have shown an impertinent man the door with greater dignity. After this little scene the game of forfeits went on for only a short time; everyone felt rather ill at ease, not so much because of the scene itself as because of another vague but oppressive feeling. No one spoke of it, but everyone was conscious of it in himself and in his neighbour. Maydanov read us his poem, and Malevsky praised it with exaggerated warmth. “How keen he is to show us now what a good fellow he is,” Lushin whispered to me. We soon left. Zinaida suddenly became thoughtful; the old princess sent word that she had a headache; Nirmatsky started complaining of his rheumatism. I could not sleep for a long time. I was very much struck by Zinaida’s story. “Can there have been a hint in it?” I asked myself. “And at whom and at what could she have been hinting? And if there really is something to hint at, what am I going to do about it? “No, no, it can’t be,” I whispered, turning from one hot cheek to the other; but I recalled the expression on Zinaida’s face as she told her story; I remembered the exclamation that had escaped Lushin in the Neskoochny Park, the sudden changes in her behaviour to me, and I was lost in conjectures. “Who is he?” These three words seemed to stand before my eyes, traced clearly in the darkness; it was as though a low, omnious cloud hung over me and I felt its pressure and was waiting for it to burst at any moment. I had got used to many things during the last few weeks, and I had seen as much as I wanted at the Zasyekins’: their disorderly life, the tallow candle-ends, the broken knives and forks, the gloomy Vonifaty, the slatternly maids, the manners of the old princess herself—all this strange mode of life no longer surprised me. But what I seemed to be dimly discerning now in Zinaida I could never become used to…. “An adventuress,” my mother had once described her. An adventuress—she, my idol, my goddess! That word stung me. I tried to escape from it into my pillow. I was indignant and, at the same time, what would I not have agreed to do, what would I not have given, to be that lucky fellow at the fountain! My blood was on fire and coursing through my veins. “The garden—the fountain,” I thought.