continue..
does that matter? It smells sweet in a hot-house too, but you can’t live in it, can you? Now you’d better listen to me and go back to Kaydanov again.” The old princess came in and began to complain to the doctor about her toothache. Then Zinaida appeared. “Please, Doctor,” added the old princess, “you’d better tell her off properly. She’s been drinking iced water all day long. Is that good for her with her weak chest?” “Why do you do that?” asked Lushin. “Why, what effect can it have on me?” “What effect? You might catch cold and die.” “Could I really? Are you sure? Well, so much the better!” “I see,” muttered the doctor. The old princess went out. “I see,” repeated Zinaida. “Do you think life is so gay? Just look round you! Well, is it so nice, or do you think that I don’t understand it, that I don’t feel it? I get pleasure from drinking water with ice, and do you seriously tell me that such a life as mine is not worth risking for a moment’s pleasure? I don’t speak of happiness.” “Oh, well,” observed Lushin, “caprice and independence—those two words sum you up: your whole nature is contained in those two words.” Zinaida laughed nervously. “You’re too late, my dear doctor. You’re not a good observer. You’re not abreast of the times. Put on your glasses. This is no time for caprices. To make a fool of you, to make a fool of myself—there’s not much fun in that any more. And as for independence—M’sieu Woldemar,” Zinaida added suddenly, stamping her foot, “don’t pull such a melancholy face. I can’t stand it when people pity me.” She went quickly out of the room. “This atmosphere is very bad for you, young man, very bad,” Lushin said again. That same evening the usual visitors gathered at the Zasyekins’; I was among them. The conversation turned on Maydanov’s poem; Zinaida expressed genuine admiration for it. “But,” she said to him, “let me tell you this. If I were a poet, I would choose different subjects. Perhaps it’s all nonsense, but all sorts of strange thoughts sometimes come into my head, especially when I can’t sleep, at daybreak when the sky begins to turn pink and grey. I would, for instance—You won’t laugh at me, will you?” “No! No!” we all cried in one voice. “I would describe,” she went on, crossing her arms and looking away, “a whole company of young girls in a large boat on a quiet river at night. The moon is shining and they are all in white, with garlands of white flowers, and they are singing, you know, something like a hymn.” “I understand, I understand, go on,” Maydanov said dreamily and meaningfully. “All of a sudden there’s an uproar—loud laughter, torches, tambourines on the bank…. It’s a troupe of bacchantes running, with songs and cries. It’s your business, Mr. Poet, to paint this picture, only I’d like the torches to be red and smoking a lot and the eyes of the bacchantes to gleam under their wreaths, and the wreaths to be dark. Don’t forget the tiger skins and the goblets and the gold, lots and lots of gold.” “Where should the gold be?” asked Maydanov, tossing back his lank hair and dilating his nostrils. “Where? On their shoulders, arms, legs, everywhere! In ancient times, they say, women wore gold bracelets on their ankles. The bacchantes call to the girls in the boat. The girls have stopped singing their hymn. They cannot continue it, but they do not stir: the river is carrying them to the bank. Suddenly one of them gently rises…. This has to be beautifully described—how she gently rises in the moonlight, and how her companions are frightened. She steps over the edge of the boat; the bacchantes surround her; they whirl her off into the night, into the dark. Here you must describe the smoke rising in clouds and everything becoming confused. All one can hear is their shrill cries, and her wreath is left lying on the bank.” Zinaida fell silent. (“Oh, she is in love!” I thought again.) “And is that all?” asked Maydanov. “That’s all,” she replied. “That can’t be the subject of a whole epic poem,” he remarked pompously, “but I shall make use of your idea for a lyric poem.” “In the romantic style?” asked Malevsky. “Of course, in the romantic style. The Byronic.” “Well, in my opinion Hugo is better than Byron,” the young count declared nonchalantly. “More interesting.” “Hugo is a first-rate writer,” replied Maydanov, “and my friend Tonkosheyev, in his Spanish novel El Trovador—” “Oh,” interrupted Zinaida, “is that the book with the question marks upside down?” “Yes. That is the rule with the Spaniards. What I wanted to say was that Tonkosheyev—” “Oh, dear, you’ll be arguing again about classicism and romanticism,” Zinaida interrupted him a second time. “Come, we’d better play a game.” “Forfeits?” Lushin asked. “No. Forfeits is boring. Let’s play comparisons.” (Zinaida had invented this game herself. Some object was mentioned, and everyone tried to compare it with something else, and the one who chose the best comparison got the prize.) She went up to the window. The sun had just set; long red clouds stood high in the sky. “What are those clouds like?” asked Zinaida, and, without waiting for an answer, said, “I think they are like the purple sails on the golden ship in which Cleopatra sailed to meet Antony. Remember, Maydanov, you were telling me about it not long ago?” All of us, like Polonius in Hamlet, declared that the clouds were exactly like those sails and that not one of us could find a better comparison. “And how old was Antony then?” asked Zinaida. “He was certainly a young man,” observed Malevsky. “Yes, a young man,” Maydanov affirmed emphatically. “I’m sorry,” cried Lushin, “but he was over forty!” “Over forty,” repeated Zinaida, giving him a quick glance. I went home soon. “She’s in love,” my lips whispered involuntarily. “But with whom?” Days passed. Zinaida became stranger and stranger and more and more incomprehensible. One day I went into her room and saw her sitting on a wicker chair with her head pressed against the sharp edge of the table. She sat up—her face was wet with tears. “Oh, it’s you!” she said with a cruel smile. “Come here.” I went up to her. She put her hand on my head and, seizing me by the hair suddenly began to twist it. “It hurts!” I said at last. “Oh, it hurts, does it? And do you think it doesn’t hurt me? Me?” she repeated. “Oh, dear!” she cried suddenly, seeing she had pulled a little tuft of hair out of my head. “What have I done? Poor M’sieu Woldemar!” She carefully smoothed the hair she had torn out, wrapped it round her finger, and twisted it into a ring. “I’ll put your hair in a locket and wear it round my neck,” she said, tears still glistening in her eyes. “This will perhaps comfort you a little, and now good-bye.” I returned home to discover a disagreeable state of affairs. My mother was having words with my father, she was reproaching him for something; and he, as was his habit, responded with a polite and frigid silence, and soon left the house. I could not hear what my mother was saying, and, anyway, I had other things on my mind; I remember only that after her talk with my father, she sent for me to the study and told me that she was very displeased with my frequent visits to the old princess, who, in her words, was “une femme capable de tout.” I kissed her hand (this was what I always did when I wanted to cut short a conversation) and went up to my room. Zinaida’s tears had completely bewildered me. I simply did not know what to think and was about to burst into tears myself: I was a child, after all, in spite of my sixteen years. I was no longer thinking of Malevsky, though Belovzorov was assuming more and more menacing attitudes every day and kept looking at the shifty count like a wolf at a sheep. As for me, I had no longer any thought of anyone or anything. I was lost in all sorts of speculations and was always trying to find some secluded spots. I became particularly fond of the ruins of the hot-house. I used to climb onto the high wall, sit on top of it, and remain sitting there, an unhappy, solitary, and melancholy youth, so that in the end I felt sorry for myself. And how sweet were those mournful sensations! How I revelled in them! One day I was sitting on the wall, looking into the distance and listening to the ringing of the church bells; suddenly something passed over me—it wasn’t a wind, it wasn’t a