continue..
glanced at Mikhaïla. He nudged him with his elbow, and whispered: “Had I better take it?” Mikhaïla nodded his head, meaning: “You had better take the job.” Semyon took Mikhaïla’s advice; he agreed to make a pair of boots that would not rip or wear out of shape before the year was over. The barin shouted to his footman, ordered him to take the boot from his left foot; then he stretched out his leg: “Take the measure!” Semyon cut off a piece of paper seventeen inches long, smoothed it out knelt down, wiped his hands nicely on his apron, so as not to soil the barin’s stockings, and began to take the measure. Semyon took the measure of the sole, he took the measure of the instep; then he started to measure the calf of the leg, but the paper was not long enough. The leg at the calf was as thick as a beam. “Look out; don’t make it too tight around the calf!” Semyon was going to cut another piece of paper. The barin sat there, rubbing his toes together in his stockings, and looking at the inmates of the cottage; he caught sight of Mikhaïla. “Who is that yonder?” he asked; “does he belong to you?” “He is a master workman. He will make the boots.” “Look here,” says the barin to Mikhaïla, “remember that they are to be made so as to last a whole year.” Semyon also looked at Mikhaïla; he saw that Mikhaïla was paying no attention, but was standing in the corner, as if he saw someone there behind the barin. Mikhaïla gazed and gazed, and suddenly smiled, and his whole face lighted up. “What a fool you are, showing your teeth that way! You had better see to it that the boots are ready in time.” And Mikhaïla replied: “They will be ready as soon as they are needed.” “Very well.” The barin drew on his boot, wrapped his shuba round him, and went to the door. But he forgot to stoop, and so struck his head against the lintel. The barin stormed and rubbed his head; then he got into his sleigh and drove off. After the barin was gone Semyon said: “Well, he’s as solid as a rock! You could not kill him with a mallet. His head almost broke the doorpost, but it did not seem to hurt him much.” And Matriona said: “How can they help getting fat, living as they do? Even death does not carry off such a nail as he is.” And Semyon said to Mikhaïla: “Now, you see, we have taken this work, and we must do it as well as we can. The leather is expensive, and the barin gruff. We must not make any blunder. Now, your eye has become quicker, and your hand is more skillful, than mine; there’s the measure. Cut out the leather, and I will be finishing up those vamps.” Mikhaïla did not fail to do as he was told; he took the barin’s leather, stretched it out on the table, doubled it over, took the knife, and began to cut. Matriona came and watched Mikhaïla as he cut, and she was amazed to see what he was doing. For she was used to cobbler’s work, and she looked and saw that Mikhaïla was not cutting the leather for boots, but in rounded fashion. Matriona wanted to speak, but she thought in her own mind: “Of course I can’t be expected to understand how to make boots for gentlemen; Mikhaïla must understand it better than I do; I will not interfere.” After he had cut out the work, he took his waxed ends and began to sew, not as one does in making boots, with double threads, but with one thread, just as slippers are made. Matriona wondered at this also, but still she did not like to interfere. And Mikhaïla kept on steadily with his work. It came time for the nooning; Semyon got up, looked, and saw that Mikhaïla had been making slippers out of the barin’s leather. Semyon groaned. “How is this?” he asked himself. “Mikhaïla has lived with me a whole year, and never made a mistake, and now he has made such a blunder! The barin ordered thick-soled boots, and he has been making slippers without soles! He has ruined the leather. How can I make it right with the barin? We can’t find such leather.” And he said to Mikhaïla: “What is this you have been doing?… My dear fellow, you have ruined me! You know the barin ordered boots, and what have you made?” He was in the midst of his talk with Mikhaïla when a knock came at the rapper; someone was at the door. They looked out of the window, someone had come on horseback, and was fastening the horse. They opened the door. The same barin’s footman came walking in. “Good day.” “Good day to you; what is it?” “My mistress sent me in regard to a pair of boots.” “What about the boots?” “It is this. My barin does not need the boots; he has gone from this world.” “What is that you say?” “He did not live to get home from your house; he died in the sleigh. When the sleigh reached home, we went to help him out, but there he had fallen over like a bag, and there he lay stone dead, and it took all our strength to lift him out of the sleigh. And his lady has sent me, saying: ‘Tell the shoemaker of whom your barin just ordered boots from leather which he left with him—tell him that the boots are not needed, and that he is to make a pair of slippers for the corpse out of that leather just as quick as possible.’ And I was to wait till they were made, and take them home with me. And so I have come.” Mikhaïla took the rest of the leather from the table and rolled it up; he also took the slippers, which were all done, slapped them together, wiped them with his apron, and gave them to the young man. The young man took them. “Goodby, friends! Good luck to you!” Still another year, and then two more passed by, and Mikhaïla had now been living five years with Semyon. He lived in just the same way as before. He never went anywhere, he kept his own counsels, and in all that time he smiled only twice—once when Matriona gave him something to eat, and the other time when he smiled on the barin. Semyon was more than contented with his workman, and he no longer asked him where he came from; his only fear was lest Mikhaïla should leave him. One time they were all at home. The mother was putting the iron kettles on the oven, and the children were playing on the benches and looking out of the window. Semyon was pegging away at one window, and Mikhaïla at the other was putting lifts on a heel. One of the boys ran along the bench toward Mikhaïla, leaned over his shoulder, and looked out of the window. “Uncle Mikhaïla, just look! a merchant’s wife is coming to our house with some little girls. And one of the little girls is a cripple.” The words were scarcely out of the boy’s mouth before Mikhaïla threw down his work, leaned over toward the window, and looked out-of-doors. And Semyon was surprised. Never before had Mikhaïla cared to look out, but now his face seemed soldered to the window; he was looking at something very intently. Semyon also looked out of the window: he saw a woman coming straight through his yard; she was neatly dressed; she had two little girls by the hand; they wore shubkas, and kerchiefs over their heads. The little girls looked so much alike that it was hard to tell them apart, except that one of the little girls was lame in her foot; she limped as she walked. The woman came into the entry, felt about in the dark, lifted the latch, and opened the door. She let the two little girls go before her into the cottage, and then she followed. “How do you do, friends?” “Welcome! What can we do for you?” The woman sat down by the table; the two little girls clung to her knee; they were bashful. “These little girls need to have some goatskin shoes made for the spring.” “Well, it can be done. We don’t generally make such small ones; but it’s perfectly easy, either with welts or lined with linen. This here is Mikhaïla; he’s my master workman.” Semyon glanced at Mikhaïla, and saw that he had thrown down his work, and was sitting with his eyes fastened on the little girls. And Semyon was amazed at Mikhaïla. To be sure the little girls were pretty; they had dark eyes, they were plump