continue..
folded on his knees, his head was bent on his breast, his eyes were shut, and he kept frowning, as if something stifled him. Matriona made no reply. Semyon went on to say: “Matriona, can it be that God is not in you?” Matriona heard his words, and glanced again at the stranger, and suddenly her anger vanished. She turned from the door, went to the corner where the oven was, and brought the supper. She set a bowl on the table, poured out the kvass, and put on the last of the crust. She gave them the knife and the spoons. “Have some victuals,” she said. Semyon touched the stranger. “Draw up, young man,” said he. Semyon cut the bread and crumbled it into the bowl, and they began to eat their supper. And Matriona sat at the end of the table, leaned on her hand, and gazed at the stranger. And Matriona began to feel sorry for him, and she took a fancy to him. And suddenly the stranger brightened up, ceased to frown, lifted his eyes to Matriona, and smiled. After they had finished their supper, the woman cleared off the things, and began to question the stranger: “Where are you from?” “I do not belong hereabouts.” “How did you happen to get into this road?” “I cannot tell you.” “Who maltreated you?” “God punished me.” “And you were lying there stripped?” “Yes; there I was lying all naked, freezing to death, when Semyon saw me, had compassion on me, took off his caftan, put it on me, and bade me come home with him. And here you have fed me, given me something to eat and to drink, and have taken pity on me. May the Lord requite you!” Matriona got up, took from the window Semyon’s old shirt which she had been patching, and gave it to the stranger; then she found a pair of drawers and gave them also to him. “There now,” said she, “I see that you have no shirt. Put these things on, and then lie down wherever you please, in the loft or on the oven.” The stranger took off the caftan, put on the shirt, and went to bed in the loft. Matriona put out the light, took the caftan, and lay down beside her husband. Matriona covered herself up with the skirt of the caftan, but she lay without sleeping; she could not get the thought of the stranger out of her mind. When she remembered that he had eaten her last crust, and that there was no bread for the morrow, when she remembered that she had given him the shirt and the drawers, she felt disturbed; but then came the thought of how he had smiled at her, and her heart leaped within her. Matriona lay a long time without falling asleep, and when she heard that Semyon was also awake, she pulled up the caftan, and said: “Semyon!” “Ha?” “You ate up the last of the bread, and I did not mix any more. I don’t know how we shall get along tomorrow. Perhaps I might borrow some of neighbor Malanya.” “We shall get along; we shall have enough.” The wife lay without speaking. Then she said: “Well, he seems like a good man; but why doesn’t he tell us about himself?” “It must be because he can’t.” “Siom!” “Ha?” “We are always giving; why doesn’t someone give to us?” Semyon did not know what reply to make. He said: “You have talked enough!” Then he turned over and went to sleep. In the morning Semyon woke up. His children were still asleep; his wife had gone to a neighbor’s to get some bread. The stranger of the evening before, dressed in the old shirt and drawers, was sitting alone on the bench, looking up. And his face was brighter than it had been the evening before. And Semyon said: “Well, my dear, the belly asks for bread, and the naked body for clothes. You must earn your own living. What do you know how to do?” “There is nothing that I know how to do.” Semyon was amazed, and he said: “If one has only the mind to, men can learn anything.” “Men work, and I will work.” “What is your name?” “Mikhaïla.” “Well, Mikhaïla, if you aren’t willing to tell about yourself, that is your affair; but you must earn your own living. If you will work as I shall show you, I will keep you.” “The Lord requite you! I am willing to learn; only show me what to do.” Semyon took a thread, drew it through his fingers, and showed him how to make a waxed end. “It does not take much skill…look…” Mikhaïla looked, and then he also twisted the thread between his fingers; he instantly imitated him, and finished the point. Semyon showed him how to make the welt. This also Mikhaïla immediately understood. The shoemaker likewise showed him how to twist the bristle into the thread, and how to use the awl; and these things also Mikhaïla immediately learned to do. Whatever part of the work Semyon showed him he imitated him in, and in two days he was able to work as if he had been all his life a cobbler. He worked without relaxation, he ate little, and when his work was done he would sit silent, looking up. He did not go on the street, he spoke no more than was absolutely necessary, he never jested, he never laughed. The only time that he was seen to smile was on the first evening, when the woman got him his supper. Day after day, week after week, rolled by for a whole year. Mikhaïla lived on in the same way, working for Semyon. And the fame of Semyon’s apprentice went abroad; no one, it was said, could make such neat, strong boots as Semyon’s apprentice, Mikhaïla. And from all around people came to Semyon to have boots made, and Semyon began to lay up money. One winter’s day, as Semyon and Mikhaïla were sitting at their work, a sleigh drawn by a troika drove up to the cottage, with a jingling of bells. They looked out of the window; the sleigh stopped in front of the cottage; a footman jumped down from the box and opened the door. A barin in a fur coat got out of the sleigh, walked up to Semyon’s cottage, and mounted the steps. Matriona hurried to throw the door wide open. The barin bent his head and entered the cottage; when he drew himself up to his full height, his head almost touched the ceiling; he seemed to take up nearly all the room. Semyon rose and bowed; he was surprised to see the barin. He had never before seen such a man. Semyon himself was thin, the stranger was spare, and Matriona was like a dry chip; but this man seemed to be from a different world. His face was ruddy and full, his neck was like a bull’s, it seemed as if he were made out of cast iron. The barin got his breath, took off his shuba, sat down on the bench, and said: “Which is the master shoemaker?” Semyon stepped out, saying: “I, your honor.” The barin shouted to his footman: “Hey, Fedka, bring me the leather.” The young fellow ran out and brought back a parcel. The barin took the parcel and laid it on the table. “Open it,” said he. The footman opened it. The barin touched the leather with his finger, and said to Semyon: “Now listen, shoemaker. Do you see this leather?” “I see it, your honor,” says he. “Well, do you appreciate what kind of leather it is?” Semyon felt of the leather, and said: “That’s good leather.” “Indeed it’s good! Fool that you are! you never in your life saw such before! German leather. It cost twenty rubles.” Semyon was startled. He said: “Where, indeed, could we have seen anything like it?” “Well, that’s all right. Can you make from this leather a pair of boots that will fit me?” “I can, your honor.” The barin shouted at him: “‘Can’ is a good word. Now just realize whom you are making those boots for, and out of what kind of leather. You must make a pair of boots, so that when the year is gone they won’t have got out of shape, or ripped. If you can, then take the job and cut the leather; but if you can’t, then don’t take it and don’t cut the leather. I will tell you beforehand, if the boots rip or wear out of shape before the year is out, I will have you locked up; but if they don’t rip or get out of shape before the end of the year, then I will give you ten rubles for your work.” Semyon was frightened, and was at a loss what to say. He