continue..
tried to justify himself, but afterwards had lost his temper and, in his turn, said something brutal, “something about Madam’s age,” which had made my mother cry; that my mother too had alluded to some loan given to the old princess, and spoken very unfavourably of her and of the young lady also, and that then my father had threatened her. “And the whole trouble arose,” continued Phillip, “from an anonymous letter, and no one knows who wrote it. Otherwise there’s no reason why anything should have come out at all.” “Why, was there anything?” I managed to bring out with difficulty, while my hands and feet went cold, and something began to tremble deep inside me. Phillip winked significantly. “There was. There’s no hiding these things. However careful your father was this time, he had, you see, to hire a carriage. Besides, you can’t do nothing without servants’ knowing, neither.” I dismissed Phillip and flung myself on my bed. I did not sob; I did not give myself up to despair; I did not ask myself when and how all this had happened; I did not wonder how it was I had not guessed it all before, long ago; I did not even harbour any ill will against my father. What I had learnt was more than I could cope with: this sudden revelation crushed me utterly. All was at an end. All my flowers were torn out by the roots at one fell swoop and they lay about me, strewn all over the place and trampled underfoot. Next day my mother announced that she was moving back to town. In the morning my father went into her bedroom and remained with her a long time alone. No one heard what he said to her, but my mother cried no more. She grew calm and asked for food but did not show herself, nor did she change her decision. I remember I wandered about all day, but did not go into the garden and did not once glance at the cottage. In the evening I was the witness of a most extraordinary scene: my father led Count Malevsky by the arm through the drawing room into the hall and, in the presence of the footman, said to him coldly, “A few days ago your lordship was shown the door in a certain house. I shall not enter into any kind of explanation with you, but I should like to make it quite clear to you that if you ever do me the honour of calling on me again I shall throw you out of the window. I don’t like your handwriting.” The count bowed, gritted his teeth, shrank into himself, and disappeared. Preparations began for our removal to town, to the Arbat, where we had a house. I expect my father himself did not want to stay in the country any longer, but he had evidently succeeded in persuading my mother not to make any more scenes; everything was done quietly, without haste; my mother even sent her compliments to the old princess and expressed regret that she was not able to see her before she left because of ill health. I wandered about the place like one distraught and longed for it all to be over as quickly as possible. One thought kept running through my head: How could she, a young girl and a princess, have made up her mind to do such a thing when she knew that my father was not free and when she had the opportunity of marrying Belovzorov, for instance? What did she hope for? How was it that she was not afraid of ruining her whole future? “Yes,” I thought, “this is love, this is passion, this is devotion.” And I remembered Lushin’s words: Some people find it sweet to sacri fice themselves…. One day I managed to catch sight of something white in one of the windows of the cottage. “Can it be Zinaida’s face?” I thought. Indeed, it was her face. I could bear it no longer. I could not part with her without a final good-bye. I took advantage of a favourable moment and went over to the cottage. In the drawing room the old princess met me with her usual slovenly and careless greeting. “Why are your people so anxious to leave the country so soon, my boy?” she said, stuffing snuff into both her nostrils. I looked at her, and a load was lifted from my heart. The word loan which Phillip had used had been torturing me. But she did not seem to suspect anything, at least I thought so at the time. Zinaida came in from the next room, pale, in a black dress, and her hair hanging loose. She took me by the hand in silence and led me away with her. “I heard your voice,” she began, “and came out at once. And do you find it so easy to leave us, you bad boy?” “I’ve come to say good-bye to you, Princess,” I said, “probably forever. I expect you must have heard we are going away.” Zinaida looked intently at me. “Yes, I have heard. Thank you for coming. I had thought that I would not see you again. Don’t think badly of me. I’ve tortured you sometimes, but all the same I’m not the sort of person you imagine me to be.” She turned away and leaned against the window. “No, I really am not like that. I know that you have a bad opinion of me.” “Me?” “Yes—you.” “Me?” I repeated mournfully, and my heart trembled as it always did under the influence of her irresistible, inexpressible fascination. “Me? Believe me, Princess, that I would love and adore you to the end of my life, whatever you did and however much you tortured me.” She turned to me quickly and, flinging her arms wide, put them round my head and kissed me warmly and passionately. God knows for whom that long farewell kiss was meant, but I eagerly tasted its sweetness—I knew that it would never be repeated. “Good-bye, good-bye,” I kept repeating. She tore herself away and went out of the room. I too went away. I am not able to describe the feelings with which I left. I would not wish them ever to be repeated; but I would have considered myself unfortunate had I never experienced them at all. We moved back to town. It was some time before I could shake off the past and it was some time before I could sit down to work again. My wound healed slowly; but I bore no ill will against my father. On the contrary, he seemed to have risen in my estimation. Let psychologists explain this contradiction as best they can. One day I was walking along a boulevard and, to my indescribable joy, ran into Lushin. I liked him for his straight-forward and unhypocritical character, and, besides, he was dear to me because of the memories he awoke in me. I rushed up to him. “Aha,” he said, frowning, “so it’s you, young man. Come, let’s have a look at you. You’re still as sallow as ever, but there’s no longer any silly nonsense in your eyes. You look like a man and not like a lap-dog. That’s good. Well, what are you doing? Working?” I heaved a sigh. I did not want to tell a lie, but I was ashamed to tell the truth. “Well, never mind, don’t lose heart. The main thing is to lead a normal life and not to give in to every passing fancy. For what’s the use of it? Wherever the tide may carry you, it will all be no good. A man must stand on his feet, even if he has to stand on a rock. As you see, I’ve got a bad cough…. And Belovzorov—have you heard?” “No. What is it?” “Vanished without a trace. They say he’s gone off to the Caucasus. Let it be a lesson to you, young man, and it’s all because people don’t know how to part in time, how to break out of the net. You seem to have got out of it unscathed. Mind you don’t get caught again. Good-bye.” “I shan’t be caught,” I thought. “I shall never see her again.” But I was destined to see Zinaida once more. My father used to go riding every day. He had an excellent roan English mare, with a long slender neck and long legs, an indefatigable and vicious animal. She was called Electric. No one could ride her except my father. One day he came into my room in a good humour, something which had not happened to him for a long time: he was about to go for his ride and had already put on his spurs. I began to beg him to take me with him. “I’d rather have a game of leap-frog with you,” my father replied,